SOURCE_DOCUMENT: Chapter 32.pdf

32.0 Field Crops 32.1 Rice

(Oryza sativa), one of the three most important food crops in the world, forms the staple diet of 2.7 billion people. It is grown in all the continents except Antarctica, occupying 150 million ha, producing 573 million tonnes paddy with an average productivity of 3.83 tonnes/ha. Its cultivation is of immense importance to food security of Asia, where more than 90% of the global rice is produced and consumed. India is the largest rice-growing country, while China is the largest producer of rice. Rice provides 32-59% of the dietary energy and 25-44% of the dietary protein in 39 countries. In India, it accounts for more than 40% of foodgrain production, providing direct employment to 70% people in rural areas. Being the staple food for more than 65% of the people, our national food security hinges on the growth and stability of its production. Annually rice is grown in 44.6 million ha under 4 major ecosystems: irrigated (21 million ha), rainfed lowland (14 million ha), rainfed upland (6 million ha) and flood-prone (3 million ha) which contribute, respectively, 67.3, 22.9, 6.6 and 3.3% of the total rice production. More than half of the rice area (55%) is rainfed and distribution-wise 80% of the rainfed rice area is in eastern India, making its cultivation vulnerable to vagaries of monsoon. In the past 4 decades, our country has made a spectacular progress in rice production and productivity. The increase was four-and- a-half times—from 20.6 million tonnes in 1950-51 to 97.2 million tonnes milled rice in 2007-08. The impressive growth is mainly owing to wide adoption of high-yielding, semi-dwarf varieties, increased use of chemical fertilizers and improved package of cultural practices.

ORIGIN AND DOMESTICATION

Rice belongs to the genus Oryza, subtribe Oryzineae of the family Gramineae. It is one of the few crop species endowed with richest genetic diversity. There are 24 recognized species in the genus Oryza (Table 32.1.1). The wild species occur throughout the tropics, especially in the lowland river basins of Amazon, Niger, Ganges, Brahmaputra and Mekong, and the islands of Sri Lanka, Madagascar and Papua New Guinea. They show a remarkable range of adaptation to different habitats. Among the wild species, 7 are tetraploids (2n = 48) and the rest being diploids (2n = 24). Of these, only 2 are cultivated species—the Asian O. sativa and African O. glaberrima. O. Sativa is widely cultivated all over the world, whereas O. glaberrima confined to Africa, still looks primitive. O. sativa is believed to have originated at more than one place along a broad arc stretching from northeastern India to Myanmar, Thailand, Laos and Vietnam to China. O. sativa and O. glaberrima are believed to have evolved independently from 2 different progenitors, viz. O. nivara and O. barthii, and got domesticated in South or South-east Asia and tropical west Africa respectively. Both the cultivated species and their progenitor species grouped as A-genome are diploids (2n = 24). The Asian rice complex comprises a perennial wild species, O. rufipogon, an annual wild species, O. nivara, the annual cultivated species (O. sativa) and its

RICE

32.1.1 Chromosome number, genome, habit and geographical distribution of Oryza spp.

*2n = 24, diploids; and 2n = 48, tetraploids; Of these, only 2 are cultivated species — the Asian O. sativa and African O. glaberrima; O. sativa is widely cultivated all over the world, whereas O. glaberrima confined to Africa still; **formerly known Oryza coarctata.

subspecies or ecotypes and weedy rices (O. spontanea) from natural crosses between wild (O. rufipogon and O. nivara) and cultivated (O. sativa) species.

The subspecies or varietal groups of O. sativa, viz. indica, japonica and javanica (Table 32.1.2), are the result of centuries of selection by man and nature for desired quality and adaptation to new niches. They are believed to have evolved from different populations of O. nivara existed then in different geographical regions. The hill rices of south-east India, the japonica-like types of south-west China and the hill rices of Indo-China are said to have directly evolved from the annual wild species in the respective regions. The aus ecotype of West Bengal seems to have directly evolved ftom the upland rices of south-east India, whereas aman type from introgression of rufipogon genes into aus type somewhere in the lower Gangetic Valley.

The sali type of Asom had possibly evolved from introgression of O. rufipogon genes into japonica-like type somewhere in the Brahmaputra Valley. Migration of hill tices of mainland Southeast Asia to Indonesia following introgression of genes from O. rufipogon had possibly led to the evolution of javanica type. The primary ecotypes (aus and japonica) of O. sativa have retained photoperiod insensitivity of annual wild Species (O. nivara), whereas the secondary ecotypes (aman, javanica and sali) have

acquired photoperiod sensitivity and adaptation to lowland ecologies.

Regarding its antiquity, it is believed that like many crop plants rice might have been domesticated at least 10,000 years back, as evident from various archaeological evidences. The most significant one was from the Lower Yangtze River Plains near Hemudu village in Zhejiang Province, China, where sophisticated farm tools made of animal bones and woods—the signs of a highly developed 7,000-year-old Neolithic civilization, could be excavated. Unearthing of more than 4,000-year-old rice grains in China is another solid evidence. Excavations from Non Nok Tha in Thailand have yielded carbonized rice glumes probably dated back to 3500 Bc. Such rice grains obtained in different parts of India date back to around 2300 sc. Samples from Lothal (extension of the Harappan civilization) excavations, for instance, reveal the use by people of rice husk along with clay in pottery or brick making. The foregoing findings confirm that the domestication of rice might have had occurred independently at different places in Asia and India could be one of them. There is a mention of ‘nivara’, a wild form of rice, in the Vedic literature Atharva Veda. It also mentions vrihi, probably meaning wild rice. A majority of rice varieties of India belong to indica group, though types resembling japonica are grown in hilly regions of northeastern and northwestern states. Along with the wild or weedy species, a very large number of native varieties and land races constitute the genetic diversity. About 420,500 rice accessions conserved in various genebanks of the world are potential gene sources for directed crop improvement. They broadly include not only simply inherited resistance/tolerance gene sources against various biotic and abiotic stresses but also complexly inherited traits for further biomass and improvement of grain yield. India has one of the richest rice germplasm collections, with more than 60,000 accessions.

BOTANICAL CHARACTERISTICS

Cultivated rice plant is an annual grass with round, hollow and jointed culms, flat leaves and terminal inflorescence, called panicle. Each culm or tiller is a shoot, which includes root, stem and leaves. There are 2 types of roots in rice—primary (seminal) and secondary (adventitious or crown), Primary root is direct prolongation of radical that usually dies within a month, whereas crown roots develop from lower nodes. The crown roots are of 2 types—original and superficial roots. Dimorphism is a regular feature of rice roots, as originally they are thick and white with numerous root hairs on their entire surface. They become thinner, branched and brownish having hairs left

RICE

only towards the root apex afterwards. Root hairs are tubular extensions of outermost layer of root, which help in water as well as nutrient uptake. These are generally short-lived. At later stages of plant growth, roots developed horizontally from internodes form superficial or mat roots.

The stem has 2 parts, underground and aerial. The aerial part, stem above the ground level, has well-defined solid nodes and hollow internodes. Initially, internodes are very short but they elongate rapidly just after panicle initiation. In deep-water rices, internodes elongate even at the early vegetative phase, being an adaptive mechanism to cope with the rising water level. Normally there are 4-6 elongated internodes at harvest, with peduncle being the longest and the basal the shortest. Although tillers remain attached to the mother plant, they become independent at later stages of growth and produce their own roots. Primary tillers emerge alternately from the main stem, projecting in upward direction. The lower the point of origin on the main stem, the older is the tiller. Secondary tillers develop from the primary tillers and tertiary tillers in turn from secondary tillers. The process of tillering starts 10 days after transplanting and reaches maximum in 50- 60 days after transplanting. Varieties differ in tillering capacity.

Rice leaf may be divided into leaf blade and leaf sheath. Leaf sheath is the lower portion of leaf that encloses stem and young leaves. Rice leaf can be distinguished from other rice-like grasses by the presence of ligule and auricle. Leaves on the main stem are produced one at a time and are arranged alternately. A new leaf is produced at an average interval of 7 days. Mother tiller bears maximum number of leaves, with gradual decline in number of leaves with rise in tillering order. The lamina of flag leaf is relatively wider and shorter than that of other leaves. The angle of flag leaf is oriented more vertically than of the preceding leaves.

Inflorescence of rice is a terminal panicle, borne on a long peduncle, which is the last internode of the culm. Panicle formation occurs at the tip of growing point of shoot. At booting stage (20-25 days before flowering) there is a bulge at the base of leaf sheath. The main axis of panicle, known as ‘primary rachis’, bears a number of secondary rachii. The secondary rachii further branch out into tertiary ones and produce in turn still smaller branches, known as ‘rachilla’. Each rachilla bears a spikelet at its tip. Like main culm, primary rachis also has a hollow internode and solid node. But in secondary rachis and rachilla, the centre is not hollow but it is filled by a large vascular bundle. Each spikelet consists of 2 sterile glumes, 2 fertile glumes (lemma and palea), 2 fleshy lodicules, 6 stamens arranged in 2 whorls and a pistil having a single central ovule, a short slender style and a bifurcated plumose stigma.

Rice is a self-pollinated crop. Normally anthesis starts shortly after the emergence of panicles from flag leaf. Though flowering normally starts from the tip of the panicle, the process need not proceed to the bottom in a regular manner. Lower spikelets, which open last, are usually not completely filled, especially in large panicled varieties. Rice grain, a caryopsis, is a dry one-seeded fruit having its pericarp fused with seed coat. The main parts of seed are husk, pericarp, endosperm and embryo. The hull is hard cover of seed, which accounts for 20% of total seed weight. The endosperm is made of starch, protein and fat. It is the storehouse of food for embryo. Almost 80% of endosperm is starch. The food needed for germination is stored in the endosperm.

968 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

Growth stages

Normally cultivated rice varieties take 110-210 days from germination to physiological maturity of seed for completing their life-cycle. The life-cycle can be divided into 3 important phases, i.e. vegetative, reproductive and ripening. Vegetative phase is most variable, markedly influenced by day-length and temperature in photoperiod or thermosensitive varieties and is the main determinant of total growth duration of a variety. A long-duration variety is characterized by longer vegetative phase than a short-duration one. Reproductive and ripening phases are constant for most varieties. The reproductive phase (panicle formation to flowering) requires around 35 days, whereas ripening (flowering to harvesting) requires about 30 days.

ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

Rice is grown successfully in different parts of the world from 39° S (Australia) to 50° N latitude (China). In India, it extends from 8° N to 34° N latitude under varying climatic conditions. It is grown in areas ranging from below the sea-level as in Kuttanad region of Kerala to altitudes above 2,000 m as in parts of Jammu and Kashmir. Depending on the pattern of rainfall distribution (Table 32.1.3), it is cultivated as a rainfed upland crop in southern Bihar (now Jharkhand), eastern Madhya Pradesh (now Chhattisgarh) and western Orissa (Jeypore tract) and parts of West Bengal (Purulia

RICE

and Bankura regions). On the contrary, it is also grown in shallow (up to 30 cm), semi- deep (30-100 cm) and deep-water (1-6 m) ecosystems in eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Asom and Orissa.

The optimum climatic requirements for its normal growth include 20-35°C temperature throughout the crop duration, clear sky during the day for better interception of solar energy and high photosynthetic activity, low night temperature for reduced maintenance respiration and equitable distribution of rainfall. The optimum climatic conditions are met during winter season (rabi) all over the traditional rice belt in general and eastern India in particular, and during rainy (kharif) season in north-west India, resulting in higher yields.

Rice is grown in all types of soils. However, soils capable of holding water for a longer period such as heavy neutral soils (clay, clay loam and loamy) are most suited for its cultivation. The most important group of soils for successful rice cultivation include alluvial soils, red soils, laterite or lateritic soils and black soils. It is grown normally in soils with soil reaction ranging from 5 to 8 pH. Because of its better adaptation it is also grown under extreme soil conditions such as acid peaty soils of

*Undivided

Kerala (pH 3) and highly alkaline soils (pH 10) of Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh. With the exception of coastal saline soils that occur in areas with high rainfall, saline or alkaline soils adversely affect its growth and productivity.

Rice is essentially a short-day plant. A combination of temperature, photoperiod and light intensity determines the growth period and crop performance. There are 2 main seasons for growing tice, viz. kharif and rabi. The kharif is characterized by gradual fall in temperature, shortening of photoperiod, cloudy days with low light intensity, high relative humidity and cyclonic weather, whereas there is a gradual rise in temperature and lengthening of photoperiod, bright sunshine, near absence of cloudy days and low relative humidity during the rabi. However, there are regions, where Tice is grown in more than 2 seasons (Table 32.1.4).

SYSTEMS OF RICE CULTIVATION AND VARIETAL CHOICE

The traditional rice farming systems in India broadly include wetland (lowland) and dryland (upland) systems. Cultural practices developed for varied forms of these systems depending on soil type, season, rainfall pattern, irrigation source and other growing conditions have been in practice for centuries. However, following the advent of high-yielding, photo-insensitive and fertilizer-responsive varieties and hybrids since the mid-sixties, there have been changes in crop-management practices, especially in nutrient management. There are in all 3 major systems of rice cultivation as detailed below.

Dry cultivation

This system is confined mainly to rainfed ecosystems with no supplementary irrigation facilities. The land is usually prepared with the help of draught animals after receiving the first rain of the season. Land is ploughed using disc harrow twice to obtain a fine tilth and uproot the weeds. Seeds are sown either by broadcast or drilling in line. In general, traditional tall varieties combining early maturity and drought tolerance are preferred and hardly any chemical fertilizers are used. All cultural practices right from land preparation and seeding to harvesting and threshing are carried out manually.

Semi-dry cultivation

In this system, seeds are sown as in dry system, just after receiving the first shower of the season. At 45—60th day after seeding when monsoon becomes active, rain water is impounded in the field. The crop is then cross-ploughed, laddered and treated as wetland crop thereafter for all subsequent cultural operations. This system known as beushen, is prevalent in Orissa and Madhya Pradesh. It helps control weeds and optimize population besides controlling the killer pest, rice gall-midge.

Wet cultivation

This system is prevalent in areas, where adequate water supply is assured either through rainfall or irrigation or both. The land is ploughed thoroughly and puddled in 3-5 cm standing water. Puddling besides making field soft for transplanting helps in reducing percolation losses of water and controlling weeds. Puddling is done largely by bullock-drawn country-made plough and wooden plank. It can also be done, as is

High-yielding varieties recommended for various ecosystems in different states

(Contd...)

the practice in large farms, with power tiller or tractor-mounted cage wheels depending on soil condition.

According to the need of the agroclimatic conditions and system of rice cultivation, very wide range of choice of high-yielding varieties is available (Tables 32.1.5 and 32.1.6).

RICE

* Based on the breeder seed production during 2000-08

GROWING RICE IN DIFFERENT ECOLOGICAL CONDITIONS

Irrigated transplanted rice

Around 45% of rice is grown under irrigated condition, predominantly as transplanted crop. Direct seeding of germinated seeds in wet soil (puddled field) is also practised in areas with abundant irrigation water and problems of labour availability.

Nursery raising

The choice of method of raising nursery depends on soil type, irrigation-water availability and seasonal factors. There are 3 recognized methods of nursery raising, viz. dry nursery, where dry seeds are sown in dry seed-beds; wet nursery, wherein sprouted seeds are sown on moist puddled soil; and dapog method, wherein a very thick stand of seedlings is raised without any contact with or use of soil.

Wet nursery: Seed-beds are prepared 25-30 days before the scheduled transplanting time by ploughing the field twice in dry condition and puddling later in standing water (2-3 cm deep) 3 times at 5 days interval. The total seed-bed area required is 10% of the total area for transplanting. For every 100 m? seed-bed, nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium are applied @ 0.5-1.0 kg N, 0.5 kg P,O, and 0.5 kg K,O before final levelling of the nursery-bed. During winter (rabi) season, double the dose of phosphorus (1.0 kg P,O,) should be applied in areas exposed to low temperature. The seeds are soaked in gunny bags for 48 hours to incubate them beneath rice straw with occasional sprinkling of water. Seeds may be treated with Pyroquilon (Fongorene 50 wr) or Tricyclazole (Beam 75 wr) @ | g/kg seed. Sprouted seeds are broadcast uniformly on the prepaze ' seed-bed. In pest-endemic areas, Phorate granules are applied @ | kg a.i./ha for protecting the young seedling from gall-midge and stem-borer. Alternatively, Monocrotophos 0.5 kg a.i./ha or Carbaryl @ 0.75 kg a.i./ha should be sprayed 10 days after sowing to control stem-borer and thrips. Water level is maintained at 2-3 cm depth. Nitrogen fertilizer is top-dressed @ 0.3-0.6 kg N/100 m? nursery-fed. Weeding

is done manually once in 15 days after seedling emergence. Seedlings are ready for transplanting in 25-30 days after germination.

Dry nursery: The procedure for raising dry nursery is similar to that for raising wet nursery except that the field is ploughed 3-4 times at 5-day interval at the onset of monsoon. Dry seeds are sown either broadcast or in close lines and covered with a thin layer of soil. Wherever monocotyledonous weeds pose problems, Butachlor (1 kg a.i/ha) is applied or hand-weeding is taken up once a week after sowing. Dry beds are irrigated frequently. In areas of calcareous and highly alkaline soils, seeds should be soaked overnight in 2% ferrous sulphate solution to save the nursery from the malady of chlorosis caused by iron deficiency. If iron chlorosis is observed in seedlings, 2% ferrous sulphate solution be sprayed. Seedlings are ready for transplanting in 20-25 days after germination. Adequate moisture should be ensured in nursery-beds to avoid root damage while uprooting the seedlings.

Dapog nursery: In this kind of nursery raising, farmer does not require a large area. Nursery can be raised at any location in just half the time required for normal nursery. Although this method requires more care, it saves water and expenses on nursery uprooting. Seedlings can be transported easily over long distances and used in mechanical transplanting. A small area of 30 m? is required to raise seedlings sufficient for 1 ha. Mat nursery is raised in any flat surface including cement floors, which should however be lined with banana leaves or polythene sheets to prevent direct contact between seedlings and the surface. A mixture of soil and farmyard manure in equal proportion is sprinkled as a thin layer before sowing. Pre-germinated seeds are sown on the top of leaves or polythene sheets @ 1 kg seed/m?. Seed-bed is irrigated to 1-2 cm water depth after 6 days. Seedlings are ready for transplanting 14 days after sowing.

Mat nursery for use with transplanter: Soak the seeds for one day and incubate the seeds for one day, apply seeds @ 50 kg/ha. For mat preparation choose the suitable site for mat nursery raising (preferably within or nearer to the main field) and puddle the selected site and raise the puddle soil bed to a level of about 5 cm and level it properly. To lay more than two rows of mats, select each bed width as 1.2 m. To cover one hectare of lands, select a plot of size of about 20 m x 7.5 m with provision of channels of width of 0.5 m and spread the plastic sheet evenly on the leveled and raised beds and mix the soil with FYM and water to prepare slurry and keep the wooden mat frame (having dimensions of 19 cm x 50 cm x 2 cm of each block) on the plastic sheet and spread the slurry mixture in each block of the frame. After proper settling, lift the frame to leave the mats behind. Take 100-110 g sprouted seed and spread it evenly on the prepared mats and press them gently. One hectare of main field needs 500-600 mats and procedure is repeated to prepare all the mats. Spread either grass or plastic sheet on the mats overnight and take it out in the morning. Do not uncover if there is rain during the first week of mat raising and sprinkle with rose can on all the mats everyday to keep the mats moist after a week when the nursery looks green, provide water through channels to the level just below the mats and apply fertilizer @ 30 g DAP/litre water and sprinkle on the mats with hand sprayer after 7-10 days of the nursery. Then nursery will be suitable for transplanting after 15- 20 days when the seedlings attain a height

RICE

Preparation of main field

The main field is dry ploughed 3 weeks before planting and submerged with 5-10 cm standing water. After incorporating 10 tonnes farmyard manure or 10-20 tonnes green manure (Sesbania, sunnhemp, Gliricidia or cowpea); field is properly levelled. Under delayed or insufficient rainfall or delay in the supply of irrigation water, the main field is ploughed on receipt of first monsoon. Field should be flooded with water at least 3 days before transplanting and recommended basal dose of fertilizers be incorporated before the last puddle.

Transplanting

The 25-day-old seedlings (4-5 leaf stage) uprooted from the nursery-beds are transplanted 3-4 cm deep following 20 cm x 15 cm or 20 cm x 10 cm spacing with 2— 3 seedlings/hill in line planting and 10 cm x 15 cm in random planting. In dapog nursery, 14-day-old seedlings are planted with 5-6 seedlings/hill.

Fertilizer management

In all 80-100 kg nitrogen/ha is applied in 3 equal split doses, one-half (40-50 kg) as basal dose, one-fourth (20-25 kg) as top-dress at early tillering stage and the remaining (20-25 kg) a week before panicle initiation. In areas, where top-dressing is not possible due to excess ‘standing water, nitrogen is applied as a basal dose in the form of neem-cake- or coaltar-coated urea. Along with it 50% N, 40-45 kg P,O, and 30-40 kg K,O are applied as basal dose depending on soil-test value. Zinc sulphate should be applied @ 40 kg/ha once in 3 crop seasons in normal or neutral soils and an additional dose of 100 kg/ha in saline-sodic soils. Biofertilizers such as blue-green algae or Azolla provide 20-25 kg N/ha, if added as partial supplement to inorganic fertilizers.

Water management

Proper water-management facilitates good tillering and better nitrogen uptake and helps reduce weed population. Uniform levelling of field and proper drainage are most essential for an effective water management in irrigated field. It is ideal to maintain 2-5 em water throughout the growing season. Water should be drained out before top- dressing of fertilizer and let in 24 hours later.

Weed control

Weed control in transplanted rice is not severe as compared to direct seeded under rainfed upland as well as in direct seeded under puddled condition. Granular /liquid formulation of new herbicides were tested under All-India Co-ordinated Rice Improvement Programme at different locations to know their efficacy to control weeds. The required quantity of these herbicides were mixed with fine sand (50 kg/ha) and were applied 6-7 days after transplanting in field (2-3 cm water). Results have indicated that whenever land preparation was done thoroughly and water management was proper, weeds have not posed major problem of weed control in transplanted rice. One or two hand-weedings were sufficient to check weeds under these conditions.

Timely hand-weeding also gives invariably good results. Some herbicides likes Anilophos, Butachlor, Anilophos+Ethoxysulfuron, Pyrosolfuron-ethyl, Almix

978 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

+Butachlor, F entrazamide, Cinmethyline+2,4-DEE recorded excellent results in terms of weed control as well as grain yield. The use of 2,4 DEE with different herbicides have shown wide-spectrum weed control and by this way, both herbicides dosages can be reduced of the recommended rate. The use of combination product not only controlled weed effectively but also reduced cost of herbicides. Recommended herbicides are in Table 32.1.7.

Weed control in direct seeded under puddled condition

Sowing of sprouted seeds by broadcast or line sowing by drum seeder is practice under direct seeded in puddled condition in well-levelled fields. Timely weed control and water management are main factors which influence the grain yield of this rice ecosystem. Recommended herbicides are given in Table 32.1.8.

GROWING BASMATI RICE

India is known for its best quality basmati rice. It is one of the major agricultural commodities the country exports every year to earn precious foreign exchange. Basmati 370, Basmati 217, Basmati 386, Type 3 and Taraori Basmati (HB 1) are the widely cultivated traditional varieties of export quality for decades. These traditional tall statured, photosensitive basmati varieties are grown in the foot-hills of Himalayas of north-western part of India including Punjab, Haryana and western Uttar Pradesh to

ensure their typical and unique basmati quality and also as required for ensuring its geographical indication. Basmati rices are characterized by extra-long slender grain, excessive elongation after cooking, soft texture of cooked rice, and pleasant aroma. Breeding efforts of the past 3 decades have led to the development of the world’s first high-yielding, semi-dwarf, phtoinsensitive basmati variety Pusa Basmati 1, combining all the quality features of traditional basmati and yield potential of high-yielding, semi-dwarf varieties. Taking advantage of photoinsensitivity, semi-dwarf basmati varieties like Pusa Basmati 1 can be grown in different parts of the country. However, to protect the trade interest and export potential it is grown in the traditional basmati areas specified above. Following this development several cross bred varieties of basmati have been released for general cultivation using conventional and molecular breeding approaches (Table 32.1.9).

* Traditional basmati, ** Developed as an improved version of Pusa Basmati with resistance to bacterial blight by marker assisted breeding

Though cultural and nutrient-management practices are similar to non-basmati high- yielding dwarf varieties, there are differences in some respects of basmati varieties. The date of planting of traditional varieties should be so chosen that cool temperature is prevalent during grain-filling stage. It is generally planted late as compared with other high-yielding non-basmati varieties in first fortnight of July for achieving superior grain quality. At most locations the scented varieties respond well up to 40-45 kg N/ ha. Higher dose of nitrogen makes the plants lodge at any stage of plant growth, which aggravates disease (blast) incidence, affecting ultimately the yield and quality of rice. However, Pusa Basmati | responds well up to 90 kg N/ha.

GROWING HYBRID RICE

Since the development of high-yielding dwarf varieties in the mid 1960s, breeders all over have been looking for another yield breakthrough. Among the contemplated strategies, exploitation of hybrid vigour was considered practicable and concerted efforts, especially by the Chinese led to the development of the world’s first CMS- fertility restoration based hybrid technology in the late 1970s. The hybrids yielding a tonne more per hectare than the inbred high-yielding varieties found extensive adoption covering over 55% of the area (18 million ha) by 1985 in China. Though countries

980 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

other than China, including India, attempted to replicate this success story of hybrid technology, they could not make it a commercial reality until 1995. Availability of parental lines, especially the CMS lines well adapted to typical tropical conditions like ours, revived the interest to exploit the technology in the 1990s. Network approach in India has helped greatly to come up with series of hybrids with yield advantage of about 1.0 tonne/ha over the best inbred varieties. Today the country has as many as 33 hybrids released (Table 32.1.10). This includes Pusa RH10, the world’s first basmati quality hybrid rice. Though more than 12 years since the release of first generation hybrids, their pace of adoption has been very slow largely on account of not satisfactory yield advantage, from growers’ point of view and less acceptable grain and cooking quality from consumers’ point of view. Further, narrow choice of hybrids, largely confined to early and medium-early duration and for irrigated ecology and susceptibility to major insect-pests and diseases are limiting the spread of hybrids. Continued efforts by the Indian scientists to address these problems have resulted in the development of more acceptable hybrids, which are finding better adoption.

RICE

(Table 32.1.10 concluded)

All these hybrids having about 15% yield advantage over the best varieties are based largely on the male-sterile line IR 58025A having Wild Aborted (WA) cytoplasm source. The package of cultivation practices is practically the same as for any high- yielding, dwarf variety except the following:

Seed rate : 15 kg/ha

Seeding density : Sparse sowing @ 15-20 g/m’ to ensure healthy seedlings with 4-5 tillers in 20-25 days, preferably in wet nursery

Optimum seedling density : 15-20/m’ with single seedling/hill at a spacing of 20 cm x 15 cmor 15 cm x 15cm

Nutrient management: N level: 120-150 kg/ha in 3 splits (based on soil fertility); P and K level: 60: 60 kg/ha (K may be given in 2 splits).

CMS multiplication and hybrid seed production

The hybrid technology in rice is based on 3-line system, wherein hybrid seed is produced by pollinating A-line (cytoplasmic male-sterile line) with R-line (restorer

line). The recommended seed rate for seed and pollen parents is 15 and 5 kg/ha respectively, In nursery, sparse seeding is done to have healthy seedlings with 4-5 tillers/seedling. A row ratio of 2B: 10A for A-line multiplication and 2R: 12A for hybrid seed production is followed.

Transplanting is done at the rate of 2 seedlings/hill for seed parent and 3 seedlings/ hill for pollen parent, adopting a spacing of 30 cm between B/R and B/R; 20 cm between B/R and A; and 15 cm between A and A lines. GA, dissolved @ 1 g in 24-40 ml 70% alcohol should be applied at 5% heading in 2 split doses on consecutive days with 18 g on the first day and 22 g on the second day.

Supplementary pollination methods (rope pulling, shaking the pollen parent with bamboo stick etc.) are adopted twice a day at anthesis during peak flowering. Roguing should be taken up twice during vegetative phase based on morphological characters and twice during and after flowering based on floral characters and sterility. Optimum package of practice for hybrid cultivation is given in Table 32.1.11.

Molecular breeding with markers

The recent development of various techniques of biotechnology provides ample opportunities for scientists to improve the efficiency of plant breeding programmes to cope up with the problems of current agricultural scenario. Rice is now a model monocot species with the following landmark achievements made possible by the advances in cellular and molecular biology (IRGSP 2005):

* Construction of comprehensive genetic and physical maps of the rice genome;

* Development of the genetic maps of chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes;

* Construction of a high density molecular map for gene mapping and map-based cloning;

* Complete sequencing of the rice genome in indica and japonica cultivars and annotation of gene sequences.

One of the practical benefits derived from the genomics research has been development of DNA markers (or molecular markers) in the late 1980’s and 1990's. Using the DNA markers of various kinds, several genes and Quantitative Trait Loci (QTL) governing, respectively, simply inherited mendalian traits and complex inherited polygenic traits have been identified and mapped for several biotic and abiotic stresses and other agronomically important traits in rice (Table 32.1.12). Marker Assisted Selection (MAS) refers to the use of identified DNA markers that are tightly linked to target loci as a substitute for or to assist phenotype based selection/ screening. By determining the allele of a DNA marker, plants that possess particular gene(s) or QTLs are identified based on their genotype rather than their phenotype. MAS is widely recognized to have great potential to improve the efficiency and precision of conventional plant breeding, which may ultimately lead to accelerated release of new varieties. The current applications of MAS in rice breeding can be considered under three general categories: (/) marker assisted backcrossing, (ii) gene pyramiding, and (iii) use of markers in standard breeding populations. The potential advantages of molecular markers are being demonstrated by numerous examples of MAS-derived products and technologies in rice. Marker assisted backcrossing (MABC) wherein a trait of interest is precisely introgressed from a donor parent into the parent of choice using molecular markers.

(Contd...)

(Table 32.1.12 continued)

(Contd...

RICE

(Table 32.1.12 continued)

(Table 32.1.12 continued)

The most successful application of this technique has led to recent release of rice varieties, namely, Improved Pusa Basmati (Pusa 1425) and Improved Samba Mahsuri carrying 3 BLB resistance genes Xa21, xal3 and xa5. Yet another example of MAS derived variety of great value is ‘Swarna sub1’. Swarna is a variety popular in lowland ecology but is sensitive to submergence following floods. By MAS technique this variety has been introgressed with a gene (sub 1) transferred from the submergence tolerant traditional Indian variety FR13A. Two more varieties derived from MAS method of breeding have been released by the state of Kamataka suitable for aerobic cultivation.

Transgenic rice

Marker technology has been of great value in rice improvement in cases wherein variability is available in the germplasm largely because of efficient screening/selection methodology. There are still many problems constraining the desired improvement of tice because of lack of natural variability. The recombinant DNA technology has become handy today to move genes of interest across barriers of sexual incompatibility. Some of the problems that have been defying solutions through conventional breeding/ selection approaches include resistance to pests like sheath blight, stem-borer, grassy stunt virus strain II. Desired level of tolerance to nearly all the abiotic stresses like drought, salinity, temperature extremes etc. are yet beyond the reach of conventional approach even with markers. Advances in transformation protocols for rice and availability a range of genes has opened up an almost limitless scope for rice improvement through transgenic technology. A selective list of genes used in successful transformation of rice is given in Table 32.1.13. Some of the important transgenic rice

Trait

Biotic stresses

BPH, Brown planthopper; WBH, White backed planthopper

HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

lines currently undergoing advance laboratory and field testing include Bt rice for Insect resistance, Indian version of the Golden rice with enriched beta carotene contain in the endosperm.

INTEGRATED CROP MANAGEMENT (ICM) FOR MAXIMIZATION OF YIELD

Integrated crop management (ICM), a vastly modified form of the System of Rice Intensification (SRI), is one of the strategies that would enable maximize the harvestable yield by narrowing the gap between actual and achievable yields. It is a site-specific package of compatible practices with synergistic benefits designed with twin objectives of (a) narrowing the gap between what is being actually achieved at farm level and what is achievable of the high-yielding varieties in a given environment and (b) enhancing the use efficiency of inputs like water, fertilizer, pesticide, etc. without compromising on yield.

The ICM is known by different names in different countries. It is known by Integrated Crop Management in the Philippines, Rice Check in Australia and Transformed Rice Cultivation in Tamil Nadu (India). The FAO has adopted the package as ICM since 2004 and is promoting it as the strategy to maximize the productivity on a sustainable basis in Asia and other rice-growing countries. Unlike SRI, which is apparently simple but difficult to practice package, ICM comprises a set of relatively adoptable practices grouped into core and location-specific options. Core options include (a) use of quality seed and seed treatment, (b) low seed rate (10-15 kg/ha), (c) transplanting young (12- 15 days) seedlings, (d) need-based nutrient application (leaf colour chart based N and soil test based P and K application), (ec) weeding and soil stirring (10, 20 and 30 DAT) and (f) timely harvest/threshing and safe storage. Location-specific options are (a) right choice of variety/ hybrid, (b) transplanting 1-2 seedlings/hill, (c) wide space planting adopting square (22.5 cm x 22.5 cm) or Jegawo (25 cm x 13.5 cm— 13.5 x 25 cm) method of planting, (d) adding organic manure (2 tonnes/ha) wherever available, (e) intermittent irrigation, wherever possible/practicable and (f) harvesting at physiological maturity of grain.

The ICM package verified on farm as well as at experimental fields reveals that compliance of all the recommended checks/practices ensured maximum of the inherent yield potential of the given variety/ hybrid in a given location and non-adoption of any of the key checks reduced the yield level by 10-20% as reported in many countries including India. Cost-wise, ICM has been demonstrated to be advantageous over the farmers’ practice with sizeable saving on monetary inputs/operations, viz. (a) seed through reduced seed rate, (b) water by 30% through intermittent irrigation, (c) fertilizer nutrient (LCC based N application by 30% and soil test based application of P and K, and (d) crop protection from pests by IPM strategy. There is ample scope to evolve this labour-intensive and time-consuming precision farming into an easily practicable package by switching over to mechanized transplanting now possible using mat nursery based Korean transplanters, restricting the practice of intermittent irrigation to rabi rice using seedlings of easily transplantable age (12-15 days old).

The yield maximization package, if adopted widely in the irrigated ecology would enable the state add anything between 25 and 30% to its rice production. The success of this strategy would, however, depend on how effectively and speedily

RICE

farmers are trained to adopt it. Farmers’ Field Schools, Frontline Demonstrations etc., exclusively designed for this purpose and organized in large numbers for at least 5 years would help achieve the time-bound targets. While implementing such programme, it is important to convince farmers that ICM is the strategy to harvest maximum of the inherent potential of given varieties/hybrids in a given environment but not the one that would ensure higher yield than the existing varietal technologies.

GROWING RAINFED LOWLAND RICE

Rainfed lowland rice is sown largely by broadcasting in dry or moist fields before or immediately after receiving pre-monsoon showers of south-west monsoon. Uncertainty of the onset of monsoon, need to plant very large area in the shortest period possible and cultural conditions in moist soil types compel the farmers to resort to broadcasting. In most parts of eastern India, which accounts for more than 80% of rainfed rice in the country, rice planting by broadcast is the most common practice. On the basis of water regime, rainfed lowlands may be classified into shallow lowland (<30 cm water depth), semi-deep water (30-100 cm water depth) and deep water (>100 cm water depth) subecologies. In semi-deep and deep-water lowlands, direct seeding behind the country plough is the practice. In shallow lowlands, planting method is determined depending on water availability and time of the onset of monsoon. Transplanting is not uncommon in this lowland subecology. Erratic pattern of rainfall distribution, paucity of ideal high- yielding varieties to replace photoperiod-sensitive, long-duration varieties, delayed or prolonged period of sowing, brief periods of drought and submergence, flash floods and poor drainage, low light condition and widespread occurrence of micronutrient deficiency are major production constraints in these handicapped ecologies. The widely followed or recommended crop-production technology is discussed here.

Land preparation

With the onset of monsoon, land is ploughed, puddled and levelled. Recommended basal doses of fertilizers are incorporated. Germinated seeds @ 90-100 kg/ha are broadcast and covered with a thin film of water. Alternatively, paddy-row seeder is used. A few rain-free days after puddling and levelling is desirable.

Fertilizer application

In general, 60-80 kg N/ha is applied in 3 split doses with one-half (30-40 kg) as basal dose at final stage of land preparation and one-fourth (15-20 kg) as top- dress each at early tillering stage and a week before panicle initiation. Water should be drained out before top-dressing and let in 24 hours later. In areas, where first top-dressing of N is not possible due to excess standing water, it is added to the basal dose itself in the form of either neem-cake- or coaltar-coated urea, which releases N slowly. About 40-45 kg P and 30 kg K are applied basal depending on soil-test value.

Weed control

Under direct-seeded condition, weeds pose a major problem. Hand-weeding should be taken up therefore every time before fertilizer application. At least weeding 2-3 times at 20-day intervals after germination is necessary for ensuring a healthy crop

HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

stand. Wherever weed is an acute problem, Butachlor with safener (1.5 kg a.i./ha) or Pretilachlor with safener (0.6 kg a.i./ha) should be applied selectively just after germination and before emergence of weeds for their effective control, followed by | hand-weeding 20 days later, if needed.

GROWING RAINFED UPLAND RICE

In areas, where annual rainfall is scanty, rice is grown as a rainfed upland crop. Of the 6 million ha under this ecology, about 5 million ha is in eastern India. The major production constraints are erratic rainfall subjecting the crop to moisture stress, occurrence of iron chlorosis and aluminium toxicity, prevalence of blast disease, termite and stink bug and weed infestation all over. For these areas, it is important to develop appropriate high-yielding varieties with very early maturity (<100 days), high seedling vigour and tolerance to drought and blast disease. The details of the method of cultivation are given here.

Land preparation

With the initial summer rainfall, field is ploughed length-wise and breadth-wise using disc harrow twice to obtain fine tilth. The second harrowing is done to kill weeds that emerge later. The recommended basal dose of nitrogen fertilizer along with phosphorus and potasssium is applied before proper levelling of the field. Seed dressing with 0.06 g Tricyclazole or 1.0 g Carbendazim/kg seed is required to protect the seedlings against blast for the initial 40-60 days. Seeds are sown behind the country plough in shallow furrows spaced 20 cm apart. Thinning and gap filling are taken up simultaneously 10-12 days after germination to ensure optimum plant population.

Fertilizer application

Normally 45-60 kg nitrogen/ha is recommended in 3 equal split doses. The first split dose of nitrogen (15-20 kg/ha) is given basal before last harrowing. If native nitrogen available in soil is not too low, the first application should be delayed till the first weeding (20 days after germination). The second dose of nitrogen should be applied as top-dress 40 days after germination and the third dose a week before panicle initiation. Adequate soil moisture is essential for top-dressing nitrogen fertilizer. Phosphorus (30-35 kg P,O,/ha) and potassium (20-30 kg K,O/ha) fertilizers are applied on need basis as per the soil test.

Weed control

Under this ecosystem, weed problem is quite severe as compared to that of transplanted and direct seeded under puddled condition. Due to moisture stress, erratic

“Apply 2,4- D-Na 20-25 days after rice emergence; fb, followed by

991

crop stand and poor growth rate of rice leads better opportunities for weeds to grow faster and vigorously than rice (Table 32.1, 14).

GROWING HILL RICE

A sizeable rice area (1.8 million ha) is in the hill regions of Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, West Bengal, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Asom, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Manipur and Mizoram, spreading from foothills (300 m above mean sea-level) to high hills (>2,300 m above mean sea-level). The main rice-production constraints in the hill ecology are low temperature right from seeding to grain filling, moisture stress in direct-seeded crop and blast disease. About 25% of the area is under transplanted rice. The method of cultivation is similar to transplanted rice under irrigated ecosystem. The rest of the area is under direct-seeded rainfed rice and the method is similar to rainfed upland rice cultivation with the following modifications:

Varieties resistant to blast disease and low temperature should be chosen for ensuring high yield (Table 32.1.15). In general, relatively higher dose of nitrogen (1.0—-2.0 kg/ 100 m?), phosphorus (1.5 kg/100 m?) and potassium (1.0 kg/100 m2) is recommended for nursery to promote better root growth and hence healthy seedlings. At planting an overdose of phosphorus (60 kg/ha), potassium (50 kg/ha) and zinc (20 kg/ha) fertilizers should be given. Top-dressing of nitrogen should be avoided at panicle-initiation stage, if very low temperature prevails.

992 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

Himdhan, Himalaya 741, VL Dhan 221, Barkat, Tawi Himalaya Cold 1, VL Dhan 163, VL Dhan 16, VL Dhan 39, Vivekdhan 62, Pantdhan 957, Surendrahan 1, Sita, Rajani, Boro 33, Dholiboro

Sabari, Govind, GAUR 1, GR 2, GR 3, Narendra 80, GR 5, Aditya, Annada, Ashwini, Heera, Kshira, Poorva, Rasi, Ravi, Ratnagiri 71-1, Ratnagiri 73-1-1, Sakoli 6, Sarjoo 49, Sarjoo 50, Somasila, Danteswari, Birsa Vikas Dhan 110, Birsa Vikas Dhan 109, Birsa Vikas Dhan 108, PMK (R) 3, Varalu, GR 8, Harsha, Chingam, Rashmi, Bha Lum 1, Bha Lum 2, Vandana, Dular, Brown Boro, Naga Ahu

RICE

HARVESTING

Harvesting should be undertaken as soon as rice grains mature, notwithstanding the stalks remaining still green, to avoid grain shattering and development of sun-cracks. In early- and medium-duration varieties 25-30 days after flowering and 35-40 days after in late varieties are considered proper stage for harvesting. Field should be drained when grains in the lowest portion of the panicle are at dough stage (about 20 days after 50% flowering) to facilitate proper filling and hardening of grains. The moisture content of paddy at harvesting should be around 20%. The harvested grains should be dried under shade to bring down the moisture content to around 14% for storing and milling. After adequate drying, paddy should be stored in moisture-proof storage structures to save it from kernel cracking and damage from storage pest pathogens. In coastal areas, when harvested sheaves are left in the field for drying purpose, rains or cyclones are a regular feature, that result in submergence of paddy sheaves for varying periods. When water recedes, grains start germinating, leading to heavy yield losses, which can be minimized by adopting salt treatment—a method developed by the Directorate of Rice Research, Hyderabad. The method consists of immersing panicles of submerged paddy sheaves without much delay in 5% common salt solution prepared in ordinary water. It helps in temporary prevention of seed germination for 10-12 days. If inclement weather continues, the sheaves should be threshed and grains should be stored in gunny bags. Use of Paraquat as pre-harvest descicant (@ 0.1% spray application) is another technique for early harvesting, thereby avoiding the loss caused by unpredictable monsoon at later stages in coastal areas.

INTEGRATED CROP-MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES

Various integrated crop-management practices have been developed and are being adopted for sustainable use of natural resource bases in general, and soil and water in particular, besides other production inputs like fertilizer, pesticide etc.

Nutrient management

Fertilizer is the most important input in crop production. Area-specific fertilizer recommendations are largely based on short-term trials, which do not give precise idea on their long-term impact on resource-base productivity, environmental quality and human health. Excessive and exclusive dependence on inorganic sources for N nutrient over years have introduced new problems, threatening soil productivity on a sustainable basis. Abandoning the age-old practice of using organic manure either alone or in combination with inorganic fertilizers has further depleted the soil-carbon content to much lower level (0.2%), showing deficiencies of N, P, K, Zn and S, particularly in intensively cropped rice fields after S—6 years. In such fields rice crop shows positive response to application of all these major and minor nutrients. Addition of farmyard manure @ 10 tonnes/ha/year to supplement 50% of the recommended dose of N+P+K+Zn+S is essential for maintaining soil fertility. The practice of raising a pre-kharif crop like greengram, cowpea, sunnhemp or Sesbania for use as green manure helps ensure production sustainability in rice-based cropping systems. The agronomic efficiency of green-manure nitrogen in terms of yield response is relatively more during the main cropping season (kharif) than during rabi season. Application of phosphorus and potassium fertilizers to rabi crop and zinc to kharif rice is found to

be economical in rice-based crop rotations. Biofertilizers such as blue-green algae or Azolla are capable of providing 20-25 kg N/ha, if added as partial supplements to inorganic fertilizers.

In lowlands, rice derives almost two-thirds of its total N requirement from native soil N pool even when recommended dose of N fertilizer is applied. About 40-60% of the N applied through chemical fertilizer is lost through various pathways—23% by ammonia volatilization, 15% by denitrification and 2% by leaching. Top-dressing of N in such lowland areas results in N losses due to excess standing water. Thus, it should be added to the basal dose itself in the form of either neem cake- or coal- tar- coated urea, which releases N slowly, thereby reducing N losses and increasing N uptake. Diammonium phosphate (DAP) as a basal dose has been found an efficient source of phosphorus in comparison to single superphosphate. In high-phosphorus fixing soils, P-use efficiency can be enhanced by 30-day delay in application of single superphosphate. Mixing of single superphosphate with fresh cowdung helps reduce P fixation @ 50% by weight of superphosphate.

Practical and easy-to-use diagnostic methods have recently been developed for major nutrients (N, P and K) to predict the status of soil-nutrient supply and to determine variable fertilizer needs of the crop. Chlorophyll meter method is one of the excellent techniques to measure leaf N status of rice and to synchronize N application with crop demand. The meter readings (SPAD values) are calibrated with leaf N concentration and critical meter values are established to determine the need for N application. For example, 35 is the critical SPAD value for the transplanted, semi-dwarf indica varieties

- in irrigated system during rabi season. Whenever the meter reading falls below 35, N should be top-dressed @ 30-45 kg/ha. Use of IRRI developed leaf-colour chart in place of chlorophyll meter is equally effective in assessing N need of rice plant.

Management of problem soils

Salinity-alkalinity has become a major constraint to rice production in as large as 12 million ha. Inland salinity in irrigation-command areas is more serious than coastal salinity. Though soil amendment is possible in sodic soils, leaching is the only means to minimize the effect of salinity. Gypsum treatment is effective for reclaiming sodic soils. The process consists of levelling the land and adding a layer of gypsum on soil and leaving it undisturbed for a few days. Then the land is flooded with water. Gypsum binds sodium and the precipitated compound is leached or washed away. Application of gypsum @ 6 tonnes/ha for sodic soils with pH 9.5-9.7 or a combination of gypsum (3 tonnes/ha) and green-manure (6 tonnes/ha) helps in effective reclamation of saline- alkaline soils. Besides correcting sodic soils, gypsum is a good source of Ca and S as well. It also improves infertile acidic soils and reduces surface crusting and subsurface hard pan. Gypsum application substantially improves the rooting pattern and water infiltration into soils, resulting in decreased water run-off and soil-erosion losses, thereby enhancing yield levels.

In calcareous and high-pH soils, iron chlorosis is common, especially when the crop is raised as rainfed upland. It is due to iron remaining in ferric (oxidized) state, which is not the available form to the plant. The malady can be corrected by either making the ferric iron into easily available ferrous form or by feeding the crop through foliar application of iron. The widely followed remedial measure is inundation on

RICE

nursery or main crop with water for 2-3 days, which helps convert ferric into readily available form to the plant because of anoxic condition. Other means of overcoming the problem include soaking seeds overnight in 2% ferrous sulphate solution before sowing and its spray to the seedlings suffering from iron chlorosis. In highly acidic Ultisols, Oxisols and acid sulphate soils, iron toxicity is the major problem. Liming is the best way to minimize the crop damage due to it.

Zinc deficiency has become another key constraint to rice production, causing ‘khaira’ disease, especially in intensively cultivated normal as well as saline-sodic soils. Application of zinc sulphate @ 40 kg/ha once in every 3 crop seasons has been found optimal for normal or neutral soils. In saline-sodic soils, higher dose of zinc sulphate @ 100 kg/ha has been found beneficial. It makes allowance for high zinc fixation, to be followed by normal application of zinc sulphate after 3 crop seasons.

Crop management

land is a practice followed for centuries. Crops are chosen for the rotation keeping in view climate suitability, sustenance of soil fertility, socio-economic needs of farmers, market demand etc. For instance, the knowledge that legumes fix nitrogen from atmosphere and make it available to the succeeding crop has been the driving force for adoption of diversified rotations in subsistence farming during the early part of this century. With the advent of high-yielding photo-insensitive varieties of rice and wheat, cereal-based (rice-wheat etc.) or monocrop-based (rice-rice etc.) cropping systems have replaced the age-old practice of multicrop rotations involving invariably a legume. Rice-based cropping systems are the most common form of intensified agriculture in India. Rice—-wheat (9.7 million ha) covering the entire Indo-Gangetic plains and rice-rice (2.35 million ha) predominantly practised in the traditional southern and eastern parts of India are the 2 major cropping systems that support more than 30% of the total foodgrains production and help greatly in sustaining food security. It was made possible because of extensive adoption of short-duration varieties of wheat and rice, resulting in increased cropping intensity in many states particularly in Punjab, Haryana and western Uttar Pradesh. With diminishing returns from these systems, however, need is being felt to diversify them. Crop rotations increase the yields and facilitate sustained productivity through increased nitrogen supply, improvement of soil health, water and nutrient availability, improvement in soil microbial activity, improvement in weed control, decreased disease—pest pressure and availability of growth-promoting substances originating from crop residues. Crop rotations also show allelopathic effects through direct release of chemical compounds in soil or indirectly through microbial decomposition of residues that affect the growth of another species. Experiments on rice-based cropping systems involving pre-kharif green-manure crop (greengram, cowpea, sunnhemp or dhaincha) followed by kharif rice and non-rice rabi crop (groundnut, sunflower, soybean or blackgram) have shown that rice crop gets directly benefited from the preceding green-manure crop.

Water management

Quantum of water needed for growing rice is determined by climatic, soil and

water-management factors. Amount of water consumed by rice for producing | kg grains is far greater than that required for most of the crops. In tropical and subtropical climates, daily water requirement for meeting evapotranspiration, percolation and seepage losses would vary from 5 to 12 mm/day, depending on the season and soil- related variability. Total water requirement to grow a mid-early (110-day duration) rice variety is estimated to be between 800 and 1,500 mm, which includes 250 mm water required for land preparation and 50 mm for nursery raising. Water required to- complete tillage and prepare land for transplanting is much less than the actual amount of water used for this purpose. The same holds true for the various stages of crop growth as well. This results in water losses by surface run-off, percolation and seepage. When all losses are accounted for, the water-use efficiency in most irrigated systems is 30-40% in wet season and 40-60% in dry season. About 40% less water is needed for growing transplanted rice without affecting yield, if the conventional water (S—7 cm deep) regime is replaced with a saturated soil regime (1- 2 cm deep).

Water-use efficiency can also be increased by adoption of short-duration and drought-tolerant rice varieties, mulching to reduce evaporation, land leveling, matching critical phenological growth events with prevailing rainfall pattern and adoption of wet-seeded rice culture. About 30% less water along with less labour are required in wet-seeded crop than in transplanted rice.

INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT

Diseases and insect-pests take a heavy toll of rice crop. Blast disease continues to be the major constraint in rainfed uplands, rainfed lowlands and hill ecosystem. Neckblast damage on basmati varieties is getting increasingly severe. Sheath blight causes considerable damage at endemic’sites. False smut and sheath rot diseases have emerged as new threats to rice production. Bacterial leaf blight occurs frequently in some locations. Rice tungro virus becomes a problem at a few places along the east coast in some years.

Frequent outbreaks of brown planthopper and white-backed planthopper, emergence of new gall-midge biotypes and increased severity of yellow stem-borer damage are some of the changes in pest scenario, following the introduction and wide adoption of high-yielding varieties. In addition, leaf folder has emerged as a new threat to rice production all over, whereas rice hispa occurs sporadically in eastern India. Such situations occur as a consequence of changes in varietal composition and improved management practices. Losses in grain yields due to these pests have been estimated to vary from 10 to 51%, Varieties resistant to single or multiple pests and their virulent biotypes suitable for specific ecosystems are now available to farmers (Table 32.1.15). Chemical control is another effective and readily available tool to combat sudden outbreaks of insect-pests (Table 32.1.16) and diseases (Table 32.1.16a).

Integrated pest management (IPM) combines several techniques such as cultural, mechanical, biological and chemical to sustain productivity with minimum adverse effect on environment. Whenever chemical control is needed, careful selection and restrained use of pesticides are essential to avoid harmful interaction. In pest-endemic areas, a resistant or tolerant variety against key pests like gall-midge, brown planthopper or stem-borer should be planted in combination with need-based application of

RICE

* Spray Carbaryl 50 we @ 900 g haor BPMC 50 ec @ 600 mi/ha or Acephate 50 we @ 700 g/ha or Ethofenprox 10 ec @ 500 mi/ha or Imidacloprid 200 st @ 125 mi/ha or Thiamethoxam 25 we @ 100 g/ha or Clothianidin 50 woe 30 g/ha. Alternatively, ap- ply Phorate 10 c @ 12.5 kgfha or Fipronil 0.3 c @ 25 kg/ha.

Spray Cartap 50 we @ 800 g/ha or Chlorpyriphos 20 ec @ 2,000 mi/ha or Phosalone 35 ec @ 1,100 mi/ha or Quinalphos 25 ec @ 1,600 mi/ha or Triazophos 40 ec @ 500 mi/ha or apply Cartap 4 c @ 25 kg/ha

RICE

(Table 32.1.16 concluded)

insecticides. Many approaches besides host plant resistance are used in minimizing crop damage.

Cultural control

Many cultural practices can reduce the pest population to a great extent. For example, repeated ploughing and deep ploughing expose many insect-pests that spend a part of their life-cycle in soil. White grubs, cutworms and pupal stages of lepidopterans are thus exposed to adverse climatic conditions and also to predation by insectivorous birds. Suitable rotation may interrupt the relationship between pest and host plant. Interplanting trap crops to trap insect-pests and subsequently destroying the trap crop to save the main crop is another common cultural practice.

Biocontrol

Biological control is the regulation of the incidence of destructive pests by using living antagonistic organisms. Insect-specific predators, parasites and pathogens that are used in biological control constitute a large component of the world’s biodiversity. About 185 natural enemies against yellow stem-borer, 126 against planthoppers, 104 against green-leafhopper, 54 against leaf-folder, 18 against gall-midge, 50 against armyworm and 5 against rice hispa have been reported in India. These natural enemies are of great value in integrated pest management for sustainable rice production, where they can often replace the need for pesticide input. By deploying effective bioagents like Trichogramma japonicum and T. chilonis in the pest-infested areas, damage caused by stem-borer and leaf-folder can be reduced substantially. Inundative release of these egg parasites 5—9 times at an interval of 7-10 days @ 10 adults/m? with 1 release site/ 100 m? results in 45-60% decrease in pest damage.

Behavioural control

Insect sex pheromone is another approach that shows great potential for direct pest contro] through male annihilation by mass trapping and disrupting mating communication besides monitoring their population intensity. Installation of 20 traps/ ha each with 5 mg pheromone impregnated lures moderately reduces infestation of stem-borer.

1000

In endemic areas, adopt seed treatment with Tricyclazole 75 we @ 2 g/kg or Carbendazim 50 we @ 1 g/kg

g/kg or Carbendazim 50 we @ 1 g/kg Spray Tricyclazole 75 @ 0.6 gilitre or Carpropamid 30 sc @ 1 millitre or Isoprothiolane 40 ec @ 1.5 millitre or Iprobenphos 48 ec @ 2mli/litre or Propiconazole 25 ec @ 1mil/litre or Kasugamycin-B 3 st @ 2.5 militre or Carbendazim 50 we @ ‘g/litre

Grow resistant/tolerant varieties like Rasi, IR 64, Prasanna, IR 36, Vikas, Tulasi, Sasyasree etc

During kharif season, the disease is prevalent throughout the rice-growing areas in India especially in Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Asom, Tripura, West Bengal, Orissa, parts of Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu During rabi season, the disease is prevalent in southem states like Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka. The disease is also common on boro rice in the states of Asom, Tripura, Eastern Uttar Pradesh, Orissa and West Bengal

Neck blast Folwering and after kharif /rabi The neck blast phase of the disease is prevalent in the states like Andhra Pradesh, Asom, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Orissa and Uttarakhand. The disease is of common occurrence in boro rice in the states of Asom and Tripura

Spray Tricyclazole 75 we @ 0.6 gilitre or Carpropamid 30 sc @ 1 ml/litre or lsoprothiolane 40 ec @ 1.5 mil/litre or Iprobenphos 48 ec @ 2 millitre or Propiconazole 25 ec @ 1 mil/litre or Carbendazim 50 we @ 1 gj/litre

Sheath blight Maximum tillering, panicle initiation to booting stage khariffrabi Sheath blight is a serious problem in coastal and high rainfall areas. The disease is mostly prevalent in areas where the relative humidity is very high (above 95%), the témperature is moderate (28-32 °C) and N application is high. The disease is prevalent in moderate to severe form in states like Andhra Pradesh (coastal), Asom, Bihar, parts of Chhattisgarh, Orissa, eastern Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Kerala, Haryana and Punjab. In boro season the disease has been observed

Spray Validamycin 3 L @ 2.5 mil/litre or Thifluzamide 24 sc @ 0.75 g/litre or Hexaconazole 5 ec @ 2 mililitre or Propiconazole 25 ec @ 1 millitre or Carbendazim 50 we @ 1 g/litre

Reduce or delay the top-dressing of nitrogen fertilizer and apply in 2-3 splits

1001

RICE

(Table 32.1.16a continued)

regularly in moderate form in the states of Asom, Bihar, eastern Uttar Pradesh

In endemic area, adopt seed treatment with Carbendazim (12%) + Mancozeb (63%) combination 75 we @ 2 g/kg or Carbendazim 50 we @ 2 g/kg or Mancozeb 75 we @ 2.5 g/kg

Spray Carbendazim 50 we @ 1 g/litre or Chlorothalonil 75 we @ 2 gilitre or combination of Carbendazim and Mancozeb (63%) 75 we @ 2 gilitre or Mancozeb 75 we @ 2.5 g/litre

Growing of resistant/tolerant varieties like Rasi, Jagannath, IR 36, etc.

Spray Propiconazole 25 ec @ 1 mi/ litre or Chlorothalonil 75 we @ 2 mi/ litre or Copper oxychloride at around flowering

False smut Post- flowering stage Kharif False smut of rice has emerged as a major disease in the recent years. The incidence of the disease is particularly more on hybrid varieties. The incidence of the disease is more in those years when a spell of wet weather coincide with the heading stage. The disease is favoured by the prevalence of relatively low temperature and high humidity with moderate rainfall well distributed during the period of flowering. The incidence of the disease is more in states like Haryana, Punjab, Uttarakhand, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Orissa, Uttar Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu

1002

(Table 32.1.16a continued)

Incorporate Phorate 10 c @ 12-15 kg/ ha or Fipronil 0.4 c @ 25 kg/ha of nursery in top 2-5 cm layer of the soil

1003

RICE

(Table 32.1.16a concluded)

* In the main crop, spray Carbaryl 50 we @ 0.65 litre/ha or Fipronil 5 ec @ 1 litre/ha

* Grow resistant/tolerant varieties like Nidhi, Vikramarya, Radha, Annapurna, Triveni etc.

Chemical control

Pesticides play a useful role in developing countries in sustaining agricultural production growth to secure adequate food and other essentials for ever-increasing population. However, in view of their hazardous nature affecting human health and non-target fauna and flora around, their use should be carefully decided to obtain the optimum benefits. Excessive and indiscriminate use of pesticides in Asian countries has led on several occasions to eco-catastrophe. In general, heavy reliance on insecticides has resulted in acquired pesticide resistance in insect- pests, pest resurgence and development of secondary pests. Insecticides should be used on need basis and by strictly observing economic threshold level (Table 32.1.12). An ideal pesticide is one that destroys the target pest species with minimum damage to its natural enemies and non-target organisms. It should be inexpensive and degradable, leaving no trace of its residue in the produce. Proper application method, correct dose and time of application are crucial for the success of chemical control. Broad-spectrum pesticides should be avoided. Some molecules obtained from biological sources and having high insecticidal property are safe for environmental security. Botanical products, particularly neem and its derivatives, are environmentally safe insecticides.

Biopesticides

Use of biopesticides derived from micro-organisms, e.g. bacteria, viruses and fungi, is another area gaining importance in pest control. The nuclear polyhedrosis viruses (NPV) and granulosis viruses (GV) have a high degree of host specificity and do not affect non-target organisms. Bacterial pathogen (Bacillus thuringiensis) is a widely used biopesticide against insect-pests such as Helicoverpa armigera. Fungal microbial insecticides are capable of penetrating insect cuticle and multiply inside the body, producing lethal metabolites. Formulations of such entomofungi have shown promising results.

RICE-FISH INTEGRATED FARMING SYSTEM FOR RAINFED LOWLANDS

Around 10 million ha rice area in eastern India is rainfed lowland with 30-100 cm deep water. The ecology is predominantly single cropped with average yield remaining

1004

1004 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

stagnant at around 1,500 kg/ha for a long time. Considering the scope for converting the constraint into opportunity, the Central Rice Research Institute, Cuttack, has developed rice-based integrated farming systems involving various mutually beneficial components like fish or prawn, vegetable and fruit crops. The rice—fish farming comprises 2.5 m wide bunds raised to 1 m all around the main field and a water storage system in the form of 2 length-wise side trenches with gentle slope (0.5%) connecting a wide pond refuge at the lower end. The net area covered by bunds and water-storage system is maintained at 20 and 13% respectively. The land-use ratio between trenches and pond refuge should be | : 1, keeping average depth of trenches 1 m and pond refuge 1.75 m. Cultural operations under the system involve growing of submergence-tolerant cultivars like Panidhan, Tulasi, Utkalprabha, etc., under dry Tow seeding using 80 kg seed/ha during the second fortnight of May, application of fertilizer @ 40 kg N, 20 kg each of P and K/ha at the time of sowing and avoiding use of chemical pesticides for pest control. Freshwater major carps (catla, rohu, mrigal) and common carp fingerlings are grown along with juveniles of 2 giant prawn species in equal proportion, keeping 1/m*. Fish species should include 30% surface feeder, 20% column feeder and 50% bottom feeder. The fish-stock should regularly be fed with oilcake and rice polish mixture @ 2% of the biomass besides regular manuring and liming of water body. Winter crops like watermelon, vegetables, greengram, cowpea, sesame etc. can be raised successfully after rice preferably on opposite side of the pond refuge. Besides, papaya, banana, okra, ridged gourd etc. in rainy season (kharif); and radish, tomato, carrot, pumpkin, bean, cauliflower and cabbage in winter season (rabi) can be raised on bunds successfully to maximize productivity. This system of rice farming is found to be 3 times more productive and 4 times more economical than only rice-fish culture, as it gives approximately 0.6 tonne of fish/prawn/year and substantial quantity of vegetables worth Rs 13,000-15,000, in addition to rice yield of

Nutritional quality

Rice along with wheat and maize supply almost 60% of the dietary energy and protein derived from plants. Rice alone accounts for 40% of the protein in Asian diet. In India, rice provides 25% of our protein requirement besides being the principal source of vitamins (thiamin and riboflavin) and minerals (Fe and Ca). Therefore, nutritional quality is as important as yield and cooking quality of rice for Asian countries including India. Among cereal proteins, rice protein is biologically the richest by virtue of its high true digestibility (88%), high lysine content (4%) and relatively better net protein utilization. Yet, it is nutritionally handicapped on account of its inherently low protein content (6-8%) and inevitable milling loss of as much as 15-20%. Past efforts have resulted in the development of high-yielding varieties with high protein content like Improved Sabarmati. Though milling is an unavoidable process causing considerable losses of nutrients, such losses can be minimized by using modern milling technology.

32.2 Wheat

Wheat is the second most important food crop of the country, which contributes nearly one-third of the total foodgrains production. This contribution has increased over years and was less than 10% in the early fifties. It is consumed mostly in the form of unleavened pan-backed bread, called chapati. Wheat straw is used for feeding the cattle.

In the past there were 4 species, viz. Triticum aestivum, T.durum, T. dicoccum and T. sphaerococcum, under cultivation in India. 7. sphaerococcum has now practically gone out of cultivation because of its low productivity and high susceptibility to diseases. Throughout the country only spring-type wheat varieties are grown, though these are raised in winter.

The common bread wheat, Z.aestivum, is the most important species, occupying more than 90% of the total wheat area in the country. It is grown all over India from the sea-level up to an elevation of 3,500 m in the Himalayas. The macaroni wheat, Triticum durum, is the second most important species, occupying nearly 10% of the wheat area. Earlier its cultivation was primarily confined to the central and southern India, with very small area in Punjab and West Bengal. Its cultivation was most common under rainfed conditions only, on account of high susceptibility to rusts. In recent years with the development of high-yielding semi- dwarf types, a large area has come up in Punjab under irrigated conditions, where it was popularized to contain Karnal bunt disease. Now efforts are on to export it to earn foreign exchange.

The 7. dicoccum cultivated emmer, is grown on a very restricted scale in Gujarat, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, where it is known as popatiya, khapli, ravva, godhumalu, samba etc. On account of a high fibre and protein content it is now being popularised as health food. A large pocket of several thousands hectares of this species exists in Belgaum district of Karnataka along the river Krishna.

The crop is mostly grown under irrigated conditions in sugarcane—wheat rotation. It has a very high degree of heat tolerance and can be sown as late as December and January without much fear of heat damage during grain filling, even in the southern zone. It is preferred for several south Indian dishes which use granular form of wheat.

The area under wheat has steadily gone up since the start of the Wheat Revolution in 1967 and its production and productivity have increased tremendously.The wheat area has risen from 12.8 million ha in 1966-77 to 28.15 million ha in 2007-08. During the same period production has increased from 11.4 to 78.4 million tonnes and the productivity has gone up from 887 kg/ha to 2,785 kg/ha.

Another major change that has occurred in wheat cultivation since Independence is that the proportion of area under irrigated wheat has increased greatly. It has gone up from 34% in 1967 to 51% in 1970 and more than 89.6% in 2006. Thus the crop has now become largely irrigated as compared to being primarily rainfed earlier.

India, in terms of production and area, now occupies the second place among the

1006 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

comity of wheat-growing countries of the world. The total world wheat production is estimated at 605.9 million tonnes from 216.6 million ha during 2005-06, to which India contributed 11.4%.

Climate

In India wheat is a winter (rabi) crop. The sowing is done in autumn and harvesting in summer. The high temperatures at both ends of the crop season determine the duration available for wheat cultivation, which ranges from 100 days in down south to more than 145 days in north-western plains and 180 days in the hills. High temperatures in October do not permit early seeding of the main crop. Early seeding increases the incidence of root rot and seeding-blight fungi and severely restricts tillering capability, crop duration and yield potential of most varieties. Very hot temperature during the grain-ripening period can result in grain shrivelling.

The annual rainfall in the wheat-growing regions of India ranges from 12.5 to 100 cm, but most of it is received in summer during the monsoon. In winter, when wheat is in the field, the rainfall ranges between 3 and 7 cm only. As such to achieve high yield, irrigation is essential, which enables the application and utilization of required inputs. However, availability of irrigation facilities varies widely in different regions. The proportion of irrigated wheat in Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan is more than 97%, whereas in Himachal Pradesh and Karnataka it is only 19.6 and 51.6% respectively. In Bihar it is 90.7% and in Uttar Pradesh it is 97.5% while in Madhya Pradesh it is 78.3% only. Prevalence of several wheat diseases, viz. rusts, loose smut, Karnal bunt etc., is another important component of wheat cultivation in India.

Agroclimatic zones

Based on climatic conditions and disease prevalence, particularly rusts, the country is broadly divided into 5 main wheat zones and a small southern hills region.

North-western plains zone: \t comprises Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan (except the south-eastern portion), western Uttar Pradesh, and the foothills of Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand. This is the most important among the 5 zones and accounts for around 40% of area and 55% of wheat production in the country.

This zone has the longest and the coolest winter in the plains region of India and the duration of the timely sown crop may extend up to more than 145 days, making it potentially the most productive region. In this zone most of the wheat crop is irrigated (98%) and the optimum sowing period is mid-November. The rainfed wheat is sown early towards the end of October. Harvesting is generally carried out in April/May. Leaf rust, stripe rust, loose smut and Karnal bunt are the most important diseases. 7. aestivum was exclusively grown in this zone till recently, but now some area has come under T: durum, particularly in Punjab.

North-eastern plains zone: \t comprises eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Asom and Orissa. The other north-eastern states, viz. Manipur, Tripura, Nagaland, Meghalaya and Mizoram, which grow very little wheat, are also included in this zone. It has shorter winter and the crop duration is around 125 days. This is also an exclusively 7. aestivum region and productivity is relatively low. It is the second largest zone of the country accounting for nearly 30% of area and 25% of production.

1007

WHEAT

Most of the wheat crop is preceded by paddy. Delayed harvesting of paddy delays the sowing of wheat towards the end of November to December. Harvesting is done in March-April.

The most important diseases in the zone are leaf rust and foliar blight. Karnal bunt incident is prevalent in some pockets.

Central zone: It comprises Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, south-eastern Rajasthan (Kota and Udaipur Divisions) and the Bundelkhand and Jhansi regions of Uttar Pradesh. This is the third most important wheat zone of the country, which accounts for more than 20% of area and 15% of production. Crop duration is relatively shorter and is around 125 days. Both bread and durum wheat varieties are grown in the zone. T: dicoccum is also grown ina few pockets in Gujarat. The region is famous for quality wheat grain production. The best-quality durum wheat is produced in this zone.

A large part of the wheat area (around 25%) is rainfed. Under these conditions the sowing of wheat depends on the moisture conserved in the soil from the preceding monsoon. The sowing of rainfed wheat is done in October. Irrigated wheat is seeded after mid-November. Harvesting of rainfed wheat commences in the beginning of March, while the irrigated crop is harvested later.

Important diseases of the zone are leaf and stem rusts and root rot. Incidence of Karnal bunt has been recorded only sporadically and has been attributed to source o seed. ;

Peninsular zone: It comprises states of Maharashtra, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu. It contributes less than 5% of the area and about 2% of wheat production. All the 3 species mentioned above, viz. 7: aestivum, T. durum and T. dicoccum, are grown in this zone. Triticum durum is the most important species under rainfed conditions. On account of a short and warmer cool season, the crop duration is the shortest and is only around 110 days.

Area under irrigated wheat is around 66% in Maharashtra but only 51% in Karnataka. However, assured water supply is limited, but wherever it is available, a good crop of wheat comparable with that of northern-western India can be raised. The sowing under rainfed conditions is practically over in October and the irrigated crop is sown in the first half of November. Most of the harvesting of the rainfed crop is over by the second half of February, while the irrigated crop is harvested in the first fortnight of March.

The important diseases are leaf and stem rusts and root rot. Incidence of Karnal bunt has not been recorded from any region.

Northern hills zone: It comprises the hilly areas of Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, West Bengal, Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim. Wheat is grown up to an elevation of 3,500 m above mean sea-level. Triticum aestivum is the only species grown. The zone contributes only about 2% of the wheat area and 1% of production. Most of the crop is grown under rainfed conditions. Irrigated wheat crop is restricted to valley regions, which accounts for less than 20% of area.

In this zone, the rainfed crop is sown in October and is harvested in May—June. The irrigated crop is sown in November. The wheat plants remain slow growing from December to February when the temperature is very low. After this the crop starts growing rapidly with the increase in temperature. In very high mountain ranges (above 2,500 msl) irrigated wheat is grown during summer (April-October) instead of the

1008

winter when the area remains under snow. Hefe, the sowing is done in April-May after the snow melts and the crop is harvested in September—October.

The most important diseases of the region are stripe, leaf and stem rusts, loose smut, powdery mildew and hill bunt.

Southern hills zone: It comprises Nilgiri and Palni hills of Tamil Nadu and Kerala. It has only a few hundred hectares under wheat, but the region is extremely important on account of its crucial role in perpetuation of rusts since all 3 rusts (i.e. stripe, leaf and stem) survive here round the year and spread to plains under suitable environments, thus posing a threat to the crop in plains. Wheat can be grown all around the year, but mainly 2 crops of wheat are raised. The first crop is grown between October and April and the second between May and September.

Soils

Well-drained loams and clayey loams are considered the best for growing wheat. However, good crop of wheat can be raised in sandy loams and the black soils also. Durum wheat is considered more suitable for cultivation in heavy and black soils, whereas aestivum wheat is grown in all types of soils. The durum types when grown in light soils tend to express high yellow berry problem, resulting in poor-quality grains.

Crop rotations

Till the advent of high-yielding, semi-dwarf, fertilizer-responsive, photo-insensitive varieties, most of the irrigated crop was grown after the harvest of maize, sorghum, pear! millet, cotton, etc. grown during kharif, Sometimes, green-manure crops, viz. sunnhemp (Crotalaria juncea), greengram, clusterbean, cowpea etc. are sown to enrich the soil prior to wheat sowing.

With the increased emphasis on intensive cropping and high yields, the rotation patterns have undergone drastic changes all across the country, particularly in Punjab, Haryana, western Uttar Pradesh where rice is now extensively grown in kharif and is followed by wheat. Similarly, wheat is now extensively cultivated after rice in eastern Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. Hence the rice-wheat rotation has become extremely important, although the sequence has several problems associated with it for which extensive research is in progress. Since this region is the major wheat area of the country, more than 10 million ha are estimated to be under this rotation. This represents more than 40% of the wheat grown in the country.

The sugarcane—wheat and cotton—wheat rotations are also common in several parts in northern India under irrigated conditions. Soybean-wheat has become important rotation in Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra.Wherever more irrigation water is available, a legume crop is grown between 2 cereal crops to enrich the soil as well as to get the needed pulses. Bajra (pearl millet)—wheat, jowar (sorghum)—wheat and jute—wheat are other rotations followed in some parts of the country. Development of short-duration varieties of pigeonpea has made the growing of wheat feasible after harvest of this crop.

Very intensive cropping sequences involving the raising of 3 crops within | year are also followed by a limited number of farmers. This may involve the raising of a short-duration variety of kharif crops, viz. rice, bajra, maize, legume etc., followed by growing of foria, potato or vegetable pea in September to December and than

1009

seeding of wheat in December to January. Such late sowing of wheat is also carried out after harvest of sugarcane in end December/January.

In north-western India and in the foot-hill (arai) areas of Uttar Pradesh, irrigated wheat is also grown as a companion crop between rows of sugarcane and potato. Up to 3 tonnes of wheat can be harvested as bonus in such a companion cropping without affecting the yield or quality of sugarcane.

Earlier most rainfed wheat in northern and central India was grown in a monocrop sequence in fields that were left fallow during kharif and kept open by deep ploughing to conserve moisture from the rainy season. Now such area has been greatly reduced with the development of irrigation facilities. In the black soils of central and peninsular India, dryland wheat is rotated with sorghum, pearl millet or cotton in kharif in alternate year. The growing of quick-maturing crops, viz. greengram, gingelly, onion, coriander and even groundnut or early sown maize as catch crops before wheat are fairly common.

All over India, the growing of rainfed wheat mixed with gram, lentil, mustard, linseed, barley and safflower is quite common. Even under irrigated conditions a row of mustard for every 8 to 12 rows of wheat is a common practice. This mixed cropping meets the farmers’ family requirement for cereals, pulses and oil and also gives some insurance against pests, diseases and other natural clamities, which might destroy the pure crop of oilseed and pulse.

Field preparation

Wheat crop requires a well-pulverized but compact seedbed for good and uniform germination. The 3 to 4 ploughings, repeated harrowing, cultivation and planking, involving 10 -15 field operations, before sowing to produce firm seedbed are considered desirable for raising a good crop of wheat. Very timely cultivation to conserve moisture in the soil is essential under rainfed condition. In the black cotton soil, blade harrow (bhakar) is used instead of the plough. The 1 to 3 ploughings with an iron plough may sometimes precede the use of bhakar.

For the irrigated cop, the land is given a pre-sowing irrigation (palewa or rauni), followed by cultivation and planking to prepare a fine well-pulverised seedbed. Recently zero-tillage and minimal tillage sowing practices using a specially designed zero-till seeding-cum-fertilizer drill have been recommended to save the time required to prepare proper seedbed under the rice-wheat rotation, particularly when medium- long and long-duration varieties of rice (or basmati types) are grown and the fields get vacated very late in November and December. Such practices can be followed even for timely sown wheat since it enables savings on diesel costs (around 60 litres diesel), labour (15 - 20 working hours) and time (15 - 20 days) which helps to reduce cost of wheat production. However, these are successful when weeds are not a serious problem or when these are controlled with the use of weedicides. Owing to the cost and time saving advantages, the zero-tillage seeding technology has been widely adopted by the farmers in north-western plains in recent years. Large number of farmers are using this seed drill for sowng in fields partially prepared involving minimal tillage operations to save fuel costs. In recent years use of rotovators for yield preparation is becoming popular. This equipment makes field ready for seeding with only one/two operations.

1010

1010 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

Varieties

For getting the maximum yield, under good management and optimum input conditions, the choice of appropriate variety plays a very important role. In the absence of a right variety, proper production technology cannot be applied effectively. Appropriate plant height, maturity duration, disease resistance, fertilizer Tesponsiveness, lodging and heat tolerance during grain-filling period as well as shattering tolerance are some of the important features for a variety suitable for cultivation under irrigated conditions. Under rainfed conditions, the ability to withstand soil and atmospheric drought during various growth stages and high temperature at sowing time are most important characteristics.

Before the Green Revolution in 1967, all the wheat varieties grown in India were of tall type. Some of the old varieties were outstanding for grain quality, wide adaptability and performance under low-input condiitions. Such types included PbC 518, PbC 591, NP 165, NP 824, NP 839, NP 846, NP 852, C 273, C 306, K 65, K 68, Narbada 4, RS 31-1 etc. These types were very suitable for low- and medium-yielding environments and had a yield potential of 2.5 to 3 tonnes/ha under well-managed conditions. However, when the fertilizer dose was increased beyond 40 to 60 kg/ha of N and more intensive production practices were followed to achieve higher yields, these varieties generally showed high lodging and yield realization was reduced. Since farmers’ feed the straw to the cattle, they preferred the tall types and the breeders of the time had to keep this requirement in view while developing the new varieties. Tall varieties are still popularly grown under the rainfed conditions.

With the introduction of semi-dwarf varieties in the later half of sixties and the establishment of their high-yield potential at all levels of fertility, the emphasis was shifted to development of such varieties, particularly for areas where irrigation is available. These varieties were able to produce around 4.5 tonnes/ha and could withstand fertilization of up to 120 kg N/ha. The currently available full duration varieties are capable of producing up to 6.5 tonnes/ha under well-managed conditions. Now semi-dwarf varieties have been developed for most irrigated cultural environments, viz. early-sown, late-sown and very late-sown situations. Varieties have also been developed for salt-affected soils. Experience has shown that semi-dwarf varieties can perform very well under favourable rainfed conditions, and these have been recommended for cultivation in the north-western, north-eastern and hilly regions of the country where soil moisture levels remain favourable for longer duration. Recently semi-dwarf Triticum dicoccum varieties have also been developed and released for cultivation in southern part of the country.

Development of improved wheat varieties is a continuously ongoing process, since most varieties in due course of time become susceptible to new forms of the prevalent wheat diseases particularly rusts, which undergo a corresponding change in their virulence pattern after release and wide-scale cultivation of resistant varieties. This change in virulence pattern is highly dependent on the extent of area coverage under a variety. Varieties that become extremely popular and cover more extensive area fall prey to new rust virulences more rapidly. Therefore coverage of very large area under one variety in a region is discouraged and more than one variety is always available for general cultivation. However, since farmer’s cannot be prevented from growing any particular variety, vast area gets covered with the same variety, reducing its useful

1011

life. Under such a situation the only solution is to develop new resistant varieties as vigorously as possible and replace the older varieties continuously on sustained basis.

Most of the older high-yielding varieties that were popular earlier in various parts of the country, such as Sonalika and Kalyansona, WL 711, WG 377, HD 2285, HD 2329, Lok 1, WH 147, UP 215, UP 310, Sharbati Sonora, Chhoti Lerma, Shera, Heera, Moti, Janak, Partap, N15439, HD 2278, VL 421, Girija etc., have become highly susceptible to rusts and hence unsuitable for general cultivation. Only a few of the old varieties, viz. HD 2009, UP 262 and HD 2189, continue to maintain a high degree of rust resistance, but have lost popularity since higher yielding replacements have become available. Sonalika, WH 147 and Lok 1 in spite of having become susceptible to rusts continue to be grown in some parts of the country in view of their very special adaptability to certain environments.

Information on the latest recommended varieties for different production conditions for different parts of the country is summarized in Table 32.2.1. The new varieties must be grown to replace the old susceptible types.

the last seven years are grouped as recent) ,

1012 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

(Contd. . .)

1013

WHEAT

Table 32.2.1 (continued)

Recent AKDW 2997-16(d), NIDW 15 (for Maharashtra); HD 2781, PBW 596 (for rainfed and restricted irrigation) Others NI 5439, MACS 2846, N 59(d), MACS 1967 (d), Bijaga Yellow (d), K 9644

1014

‘d' given in parentheses indicates T. durum wheat variety; MP, Madhya Pradesh; UP, Uttar Pradesh; HP, Himachal Pradesh

Cultivation

Sowing time

Normally wheat is sown when the average daily temperatures fall to around 22°— 23°C which happens only in November in most wheat-growing areas. Sowing wheat while the temperatures are high (around 25°C) results in poor germination,reduced tillering and early onset of flowering, thereby exposing the floral parts to cold damage.

1015

All these factors depress the crop yields. Only few varieties, viz. C 306, K 8027, N 15439, are suitable for sowing prior to end of October which makes these suitable for rainfed conditions where seeding is done early.

Under irrigated conditions, the first fortnight of November is considered the optimum time for sowing the medium- and long-duration varieties, which are capable of giving the highest possible yield. Such varieties include PBW 343,WH 542,CPAN 3004, PDW 233, K 88, HUW 468, HD 2336, Raj 1555, GW 190, MACS 2486, DWR 162 in the zone of their recommendation.

In eastern India, where long-duration varieties of rice are grown as also in a north- western parts, where Basmati types are cultivated in the rice-wheat rotation, the sowing of wheat is often delayed, and may go up to the third week of December for which short-duration wheat varieties are suitable. In several parts of India, wheat is sown after harvesting sugarcane, toria, short-duration pigeonpea, potato and some vegetables, viz. peas, where it is sown beyond the third week of December and even early January. Such sowing requires extreme care in crop management to achieve reasonable yields, since the crop has to mature within a very short duration and under very high temperatures. Special set of varieties have been recommended for such sowings. However, very late sowing is not normally recommended, because it requires extreme care to get reasonable yield.

Under rainfed conditions the sowing is done relatively early before the moisture built up from the monsoon rains recedes deeper. The second half of October is the optimum time. Since the temperature at this time is still relatively high, the choice of right type of varieties is extremely important to overcome some of the losses caused by yield depressing factors (as listed earlier). Varieties recommended for rainfed sowing possess heat- and drought-tolerance features to varying degree. The success of rainfed wheat depends highly upon the amount of moisture conserved in the soil from monsoon rains.

Seed rate

The seed used for sowing should be well developed,healthy, with good germination capacity, free from seed-borne diseases and weed seeds. It is advisable to sow certified seed. For varieties with the medium-sized grains (38 g for 1,000 seeds) a seed rate of 100 kg/ha is recommended. For bold-seeded varieties (around 45 g/1,000 seeds) a seed rate of 125 kg/ha is optimum. For late-sown wheat, seed rate of 125—150 kg/ha is recommended.

Under rainfed conditions a reduced seed rate of 75-80 kg/ha is recommended. Most of the improved varieties are susceptible to loose smut disease, and the seed used should be given either solar or hot-water treatment or should be treated with appropriate fungicide before sowing.

Sowing method

For proper germination the seed must be placed in moist soil. Sowing is done by drilling or broadcasting of seeds. Sowing with seed-drills, whether tractor-drawn or bullock-drawn, deposits the seed at a uniform depth, gives a more uniform stand and leads to early emergence of vigorous seedlings. In many places the seed is sown by hand in furrows behind the plough, drawn by bullocks by the kera method. The seed of semi-dwarf varieties should not be placed below 4 to 5 cm depth, since they have a

1016

short coleoptile, but that of the tall types can be placed up to a depth of 6 to 7 cm.

For irrigated timely sown wheat, a spacing of 22.5 cm between the rows is considered optimum. For irrigated late-sown conditions, the row spacing is reduced to 15-18 cm. After seeding the furrows are covered by running a wooden plank (sokaga). Under rainfed conditions seed is required to be placed deeper, and after sowing, the furrows are left open. Deeper sowing is also practised in rough, dry and light soils, whereas comparatively shallow sowing is done in moist soils. Rainfed wheat is sown at relatively wide spacing of about 25 to 30 cm between the rows.

Other methods of sowing include seeding wheat in untilled soils using a specially designed zero-till seed drill. Itis specially recommended for areas where wheat sowings get delayed due to late harvest of long-duration rice varieties grown in Eastern Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. However the method has become quite popular in Punjab and Haryana owing to economy in cultivation. Another method of sowing recommended for seeding wheat is bed-planting where wheat is seeded on top of 65 to 70 cm wide beds with 30 cm channel betwen two beds using a specialy designed bed planter. This helps in saving water (25 - 40%), seed (25%) and fertilizers (25%) without any adverse effect on yield.

Some farmers sow the crop by broadcasting seeds in the well-prepared fields followed by harrowing. Good plant stand be achieved only when top soil layer has adequate moisture, higher seed rate is used and operation is performed by experienced worker. However, this is an undesirable practice since seed cannot be spread uniformly, and get placed at variable depths resulting in erratic crop stand and mechanical weeders cannot be used. In case this method has to be adopted under certain constraints then seed rate should be increased by 25% and moisture availability ensured in top-soil level.

Irrigation

Wheat sown under irrigated conditions requires 4 to 6 irrigations, depending on the soil and weather conditions. Heavy deep soils with good water-holding capacity may require only 3 to 4 heavy (7 to 9 cm) irrigators whereas 6 to 8 lighter (5 to 6 cm) may be required in sandy soils. Higher temperatures during any of the crop growth phases may necessitate additional irrigation. Adjustments need to be made for rainfall during crop season.

There are several methods to decide when to apply irrigation. These include soil moisture level determination, consumptive water use and physiological crop stage. The last method is the easiest to follow since no specific measurements and estimates are required and can be readily followed by farmers. In this method the first irrigation is given at the crown-root initiation (CRI) stage, i.e.20-25 days after sowing, followed by irrigation at late tillering, late jointing, flowering, milk and dough stages. Among these, crown-root-initiation stage is the most critical for irrigation since the crown roots are formed at around 2 cm of soil depth, irrespective of depth of seed placement and this is the level which is subject of fastest drying. Under dry-soil conditions roots fail to grow and subsequently result in yield loss. Irrigation during grain falling is also extremely important since inadequate moisture can lead to grain shrivelling.

Two or three extra irrigations may be required where the soils are very light or

1017

sandy and in the central and peninsula zones where temperatures are relatively higher. Irrigation should be avoided at the stage during which sufficient (rainfall of more than 1 cm) has occurred, as also during the windy weather particularly post-flowering stage to prevent lodging of the crop.

Under limited water supply the number of irrigations depends on the quantum of its availability, i.e. (a) if water is available for only 1 irrigation, it should be applied at the crown-root-initiation stage (CRI); (b) if water is available for 2 irrigations, the first irrigation should be applied at the crown-root initiation and the second at boot- leaf stage, i.e. 7 to 8 weeks after the first irrigation; and (c) if water is available for 3 irrigations, the first irrigation should be given at the crown-root-initiation stage, followed by boot and milk stages.

Weed control

Keeping weeds under controls is very crucial for achieving high yield levels. Maximum damage is caused by weeds during early growth stages. Several methods are available for their control including hand-held equipment, power driven implements and chemical weedicides. Hoeing or interculturing a few days after the first and second irrigations or rain will break the crust and also help remove the weeds. On a small- scale hand-held equipment, viz. khurpi, hand hoe, etc. are used. Several power-drawn implement, viz. cultivators, are also used.

Use of chemical weedicides has become quite prevalent in several parts of the country, since it is economical, effective and enables timely control of weeds. For controlling non-graminaceous broad-leaf weeds, a spray of 2, 4-D sodium salt @ 625 ga.i/ha in 750 litres water 4 to 6 weeks after sowing is effective. Spraying before or after this specific period will be harmful to the wheat crop. If graminaceous weeds, e.g. Phalaris minor (foxtail weed) and wild oats (Avena ludoviciana), are present, use of Isoproturon @ 1.0 kg a.i/ha or pre-emergence weedicides, viz. Pendimethalin @ 1.0 kg a.i/ha 2-3 days after sowing, is quite effective. Widespread use of same weedicides (Isoproturon) over several years in Haryana and Punjab has resulted in development of resistant forms of Phalaris. In such situations use of Sulfosulfuron @ 45 ga.i/ha is recommended. Other recommended weedicides include Metribuzin, Clodinafop, Fenoxoprop ethyl, Metsulfuron methyl for specific situations.

Fertilization

To achieve high productivity levels use of synthetic fertilizers is very essential. It should be remembered that large quantities of plant nutrients are removed from the soil along with the harvest of grain and straw. The nutrients removed from the soil include large quantities of N, P and K along with small amounts of several other elements. Average quantities of nutrients removal for each tonne of grain harvest along with 2 tonnes of straw amount 25 kg N, 2 kg P,O, and 38 kg K along with 5 to 6 kg of each of S, Mg and Ca and small quantities of elements like Fe, Mn, Zn, B, Cu etc. Unless these nutrients are replaced through considered application sustaining high productivity over time is not possible.

Use of organic manures is highly effective to achieve and sustain reasonable yield levels since these contain small amounts of all plant nutrients. Organic manures are also essential to maintain biological processes and soil physical properties. However,

1018

to achieve higher levels of productivity use of synthetic fertilizers is essential. Therefore integrated nutrients management involving balanced use of synthetic fertilizers and organic manures is essential to sustain high productivity levels.

Use of farmyard manure @ 5-10 tonnes/ha is recommended for cultivation of wheat both under rainfed and irrigated conditions which should be applied 5 to 6 weeks before wheat sowing.

Normaly farmers do not apply synthetic fertilizers to the rainfed wheat in the majority of cases but farmyard manure or some other organic matter is frequently used. The rainfed wheat is greatly benefited, if 40 kg N/ha and 20 kg P,O,/ha are applied. It should be applied 10 cm deep (3-4 cm below the seed) at or before sowing.

The fertilizer dose recommended for the timely sown irrigated wheat is 80-150 kg/ ha nitrogen (N) (depending upon soil-fertility status), 40-60 kg/ha phosphorus (P,O,) and 40 kg/ha potassium (K,O) (based on soil-test results). The indicated lower levels are commended for high fertility status soils or wheat sown after harvest of legume crops. Where a green-manure crop precedes wheat, the farmer should give all the phosphorus that is subsequently used by the wheat crop. In a cropping system involving the rice-wheat rotation, all the potassium needed under this system should be given to the rice crop and all the phosphorus to the wheat crop, and nitrogen to both the crops.

For the late-sown irrigated wheat crop, the recommended dose of fertilizer is 60— 80 kg N/ha, 30-40 kg/P,O, ha and 25-30 kg/K,O ha.

Total quantities of phosphorus and potassium and half of nitrogen should be placed 5 cm below the seed at the sowing. The remaining quantity of nitrogen should be applied at the first irrigation at crown- root initiation. In lighter / sandy soils it should be applied in two splits, i.e. one-fourth at first and the remaining at second irrigation. Indian soils are generally not deficient in potassium, but its application should be adjusted according to the soil-test results.

Zinc, manganese, sulphur and boron deficiencies are becoming important in some areas with light soils under high intensity cultivation. Zn, Mn and S deficiency has been reported from Punjab, parts of Haryana, western Uttar Pradesh and Delhi. While B deficiency has been reported from West Bengal, Bihar and Eastern Uttar Pradesh. If Zn deficiency is acute, a dose of 50 kg zinc sulphate/ha is recommended. In moderately deficient soils 25 kg/ha of this chemical is sufficient. S deficiency can be removed by the use of fertilizers containing sulfur such as ammonium sulfate, single superphosphate etc. Spray of 0.5% solution of MnSO, against Mn deficiency and solubor against B deficiency if symptoms are noticed in growing crops is recommended.

Insect-pests and diseases

Diseases

Three rusts, viz. leaf or brown (caused by Puccinia recondita), stripe or yellow (caused by P. striiformis) and stem or black (caused by P. graminis tritici), are the most important diseases of wheat in India. The best strategy is to grow rust-resistant varieties. All improved wheat varieties at the time of release are resistant to the rust types prevalent in the zone for which recommendations are made. Later in due course of time these may become susceptible to the new races of these rusts, which also undergo changes by various mechanisms. It is therefore very important to grow the latest released varieties and discard the older types.

1019

WHEAT

Loose smut (caused by Ustilago tritici) is also an important disease of wheat, whose expression Is most serious in north-western parts and hilly regions of the country. Most of the improved varieties are susceptible to this disease. Hence it is important that in the disease-prone areas before sowing the seed is treated with systemic fungicides, viz. Carboxin or Carbendazim @ 2.5 g/kg seed. Solar treatment can also be used to control the disease.

Since the disease is strictly internally seed bore, if adequate precautions are taken at the seed production Stages and the disease infection is not allowed to occur at flowering through rigid disease-control measures in the seed production plot, there may be little need to treat the seed for commercial sowing.

Karnal bunt (caused by Neovossia indica) is another disease of wheat that can pose serious threat to wheat crop in same areas. It is an important disease for the north- western plains of the country. The best strategy is to grow resistant or tolerant varieties in disease-prone areas. Timely sowing and avoiding irrigation at flower-emergence stage helps reduce its incidence. Among the other wheat diseases, foliar blights (caused by Helminthosporium spp. and Alternaria spp.) are extremely important in the north- eastern region.

Powdery mildew (caused by Erysiphe graminis tritici) is quite important in the Northern hills zone and Northern plains zone. Karnal bunt, foliar blight and powdery mildew can be controlled by spray of 0.1% Propiconazole at appropriate stage. Hill bunt (caused by Tilletia foetida and T. carries), flag smut (caused by Urocystis agropyri), and foot-rot (caused by Helminthosporium spp., Sclerotium spp., Fusarium spp. and Pythium spp.) are of sporadic occurrence in various parts of the country and can be controlled by the use of appropriate fungicides.

Among the diseases caused by nematodes ear-cockle or tundu (caused by Anguina tritici and Clavibacter tritici) and molya (caused by Heterodera avenae) are of sporadic occurrence in various parts of the country. Ear-cockle can be easily controlled by the removal of nematode galls from the seed before sowing or flotation in 2% common salt solution. Molya disease is important in Rajasthan and Haryana. It can be controlled by repeated summer ploughing, rotation with non-host crops, viz. gram, carrot, radish and marigold, or growing resistant varieties of barley for 1-2 yeas

Insect-pests

These are not very serious in general but termites, shoot-fly, aphids, brown wheat mite, cut worms and borers can pose problems. Among these, termites are the most serious and can be controlled by treatment of seed with Chlorpyriphos or Endosulfan. These insecticides can also be used for soil treatment if the termite damage is noticed after sowing the crop.

Aphids are another insect-pests which have started becoming important in several parts of the country. These can be controlled by the spray of Dimethoate, Oxydemeton methyl or Monocrotophos.

Post-harvest operations

The crop is harvested when the grains harden and the straw becomes dry and brittle. Harvesting of the crop when plants tum yellow / white before complete drying is recommended to reduce losses due to shattering. At this stage grains have already

1020

become hard and break rather then crush when pressed under teeth. The harvesting time varies from zone to zone and also depends on the rainfed or irrigated condition of the crop. The rainfed crop sown early reaches the harvest stage much earlier than the irrigated crop.

In peninsular zone, harvesting starts in the latter half of February and most of it is over by the end of this month or in the beginning of March. In the central zone, the crop starts ripening by the end of February, and the peak of harvesting season is March. In eastern zone, it starts in the latter part of March and is generally over by mid-April. In north-western zone, the crop ripens in the mid-April and the latter half of April is the peak harvesting time. In hills the crop is harvested in May—June, depending on altitude. The same wheat variety behaves differently in respect of maturity in different zones. For example, variety Sonalika matures by the end of February in the peninsular zone, while it matures by May in the hill zone in spite of it sowing in November in both the zones. High temperatures in the south shorten its growing period whereas in the hills the low temperatures lengthen its life cycle.

Most of the harvesting in India is done with the sickle. Only in recent years, the combines are being used for harvesting in Punjab, western Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh. These are generally operated on custom- hire basis.

Simple mechanical threshers, have become the most widely used implements for threshing and winnowing of wheat all across the country. These machines thresh and winnow in one go. Most of these threshers are locally made or obtained from Punjab, Haryana and western Uttar Pradesh, where these are manufactured on a large scale.

The traditional method of threshing by treading of cattle and winnowing has become obsolete, and is followed only in very backward or tribal areas.

Yields

The yield under rainfed conditions is generally low. It may be as low as 0.3 to 0.4 tonne/ha under very harsh conditions and may be over 1.8 to 2 tonnes/ha under favourable situations.

Under irrigated conditions, the yield may vary from 2.5 to 6.5 tonnes/ha depending on the management practices followed and the level of inputs used. Some progressive farmers are regularly harvesting 6.5—7.5 tonnes/ha. Under the National Demonstrations and Front-line demonstrations, yield up to 8 tonnes/ha has been recorded. There was a notion that the best wheat yields can be obtained only in north-western India. However, recent experience with high-yielding varietites indicates that similar yields can be obtained in eastern, central and peninsular parts of the country provided the farmers grow the suitable variety, apply all the needed inputs, follow the appropriate production technology and perform all the operations as per time schedule which are very critical factors for the relatively shorter growth period available in eastern, central and peninsular India.

The wheat straw is an important cattle feed in India. Generally, the yield of straw from rainfed or barani crops is about the same as that of grain, whereas from the irrigated crop it is about 1.5—2-fold the grain yield.

Storage

Before storage the grains must be thoroughly dried. Successful storage of the grain

1021

depends mainly on its moisture content. Grains with less than 10% moisture store well. This level of moisture can be easily achieved by sun drying during May-June in most parts of India. However, in eastern India there is problem due to high humidity and special care is needed for drying and storage of grains. Retention of good viability of the grain for sowing of the next crop is a serious problem in this region.

A large number of insect species attack the wheat grain in storage. The most important are Khapra beetle (Trogoderma granarium), lesser grain-borer (Rhizopertha dominica), rice weevil (Sitophilus oryzae), flour beetle (Tribolium castaneum), and grain moth (Sitotroga cerealella). The storage bins or godowns must be moisture- proof and should be fumigated to keep down storage-grain insect-pests. Proper care must also be taken to keep the grain safe from rat damage and moisture.

32.3 Barley

Barley (Hordeum vulgare) is an important cereal crop in the world with an annual production of around 136 million tonnes, ranking next to rice, maize and wheat. It is one of the earliest domesticated food crops since the dawn of civilization. In India it is an important winter season (rabi) cereal crop grown in Punjab, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. It is grown in our country in 0.63 million ha with a production of 1.20 million tonnes and an average productivity of 1.94 tonnes/ha. Barley is hardier than wheat and is inherently equipped to adapt itself admirably well under limited inputs and marginal lands.

Barley grain has the largest use as animal feed all over the world and in India also a major share of barley grain is used as animal feed either alone or in combination. As a fodder crop, barley has tremendous potential and variation for production of very high amount of digestible dry matter as well as protein yield per hectare.

Hull-less barley grain is preferred for chapati making as well as /ugri a fermented drink, in the northern hills. A limited portion of produce is consumed as parched grain to make sattu. Hulled types are used by the malting industry, because of specific requirements during grain germination. About 0.25 million tonnes barley is used by the malting industries in the country for the preparation of beer, whisky and other products, viz. industrial alcohol and vinegar. Malt syrup is utilized in the preparation of candies, breakfast beverages and medicines. By-product of brewing and distilling industry, known as ‘brewers’ and ‘distillers grain’ is useful as cattle feed. Bold and plump-seeded barley varieties are suitable for manufacture of ‘pearl barley’ and powder products, which form the diet of the sick and convalescent people. Pearl barley is used for barley water, which is diuretic and is given to persons suffering from kidney disorders.

Cultivation

Over the past 2 decades the barley area in the country has dropped from 2.9 million ha to 0.6 million ha. The production has shown a decline from 3.1 million tonnes to 1.2 million tonnes during this period. However, the average yield showed an increase from 1,200 kg/ha to 1,938 kg ha, because of the impact of high-yielding varieties developed in the country. The great reduction in the barley area in the country was owing to the change in the preference of farmers for the cultivation of wheat and other remunerative winter (rabi) crops, e.g. Brassica spp. and gram. Barley areas with sufficient available irrigation were diverted to wheat, whereas the rainfed areas were covered by mustard and gram. Barley is grown chiefly in the northern plains and hills, but over the years its cultivation to some extent has extended to non-traditional peninsular region in Karnataka, Maharashtra and Gujarat. Its cultivation extends up to an elevation of 4, 575 m (15,000 feet) in the Himalayas. Its greatest concentration is in Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh, where it accounts for 34.1, 32.0 and 12.3%, respectively, of the total area in the country. Haryana, Punjab, Bihar and

1023

Jharkhand cultivate nearly 10% of the total area. It is also grown in Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Jammu and Kashmir occupying 9% of the total area. In the plains of southern India, it has been recently introduced for commercial cultivation as an industrial crop for malting and brewing. It is a crop of minor importance in south of 20°N latitude, although it can be grown successfully where wheat can be grown. In this region it occupies small areas in Karnataka (north) and the Nilgiris and Palni hills of Tamil Nadu. The highest average yield of 3.3 tonnes/ha obtained in Punjab is above the world average of 2.5 tonnes/ha. Haryana, Rajasthan, and Uttar Pradesh are the next, with average yields of 2.8, 2.4 and 1.9 tonnes/ha respectively. Experiments conducted in the non-traditional areas of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Maharashtra revealed the possibility of successful cultivation of barley in the cooler regions with yields over 4 tonnes/ha. Its adaptation to coastal saline areas of West Bengal, which traditionally grew 1 crop of paddy, has been well established. About 80% of the barley area in the country is grown under limited irrigation owing to its more successful cultivation than that of other rabi cereals, under brackishwater, saline-alkaline soils and late-sown conditions (in diara lands). Six-rowed hulled and some hull-less barleys are generally cultivated in the country. It is only on higher altitudes where barley is used for food that 6-rowed hull-less types are preferred for cultivation. In very high altitudes in Leh and Kargil with cool arid climate, it is grown in summer. With the growing demand from malting industry, the introduction, breeding and release of some 2-rowed improved barleys has created considerable interest towards their cultivation. The 2-row types are preferred for malting because of their bold, plump grains, uniform germination, higher malt extract and other desirable traits.

Climate

Barley is a crop of temperate climate, like wheat and it thrives best in areas having cool dry winters with low rainfall. The growing period in the plains lasts for about 5 months, which may extend up to 6-7 months in the medium to higher hills (1,500- 2,500 m elevation). The crop can withstand cool humid and warm dry climates, but hot humid climate disfavours its growth, mainly due to prevalence of diseases. In the plains of eastern, central and peninsular India, where the winters are mild, the growing period is reduced to 3-4 months. In any given region, barley matures 2-3 weeks earlier than that of wheat and other rabi cereals, indicating its lower requirement of heat to reach maturity and thus it is also inherently equipped to escape drought. There are varietal differences for adaptation to drought and irrigation requirement of barley. Frost at flowering and hailstorms at the complete grain development stage damage the crop. Rains at the maturity cause discoloration of the grains, thus rendering them unfit for malting. Uninterrupted growth of the crop can give normal bold, plump, mealy grains, fit for malting. Intermittent drought during the growth period results in premature ripening with high nitrogen content and shrivelled grains unfit for malting. Uniform moisture supply and bright sunshine at the ripening are important for the production of clean bright kernels required by the malting industry.

Soils

Barley thrives best on well-drained fertile loam or light clay-soils. Heavier clay loams are undesirable, if waterlogged. Severe lodging occurs on highly fertile soils

1024

1024 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

with excess of nitrogen, which in turn also increases the nitrogen content in the grain, rendering it unsuitable for malting. In India, barley is grown on a wide variety of soils Tanging in texture from sandy to heavy loams in the Indo-Gangetic plains and on the terraced slopes in the hills. Its cultivation also extends to a limited extent on the black soils of Karnataka. Barley is more tolerant to a saline-alkaline soils and less to acidic soils when compared with other cereals. It is more favoured under these conditions in Rajasthan, Haryana, Punjab, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. It was found to be a successful crop on coastal saline soils of Sunderbans in the West Bengal.

Crop rotations

Crop rotations depend largely on the advantages offered by the crop. Its crop rotations are similar to that of wheat but no exact rotations are generally followed year after year. It is generally grown in rotation with pearl millet (bajra), maize, rice, cotton, groundnut, greengram and moth bean in different parts of the country. Researches have shown the possibility of double cropping in dryland areas by growing short-duration (60-65 days) fodder legumes (cowpea, clusterbean etc.) during rainy (kharif) season, followed by the dryland crop of barley. Benefit from preceding fodder legume is equivalent to 40 kg N/ha applied to barley crop grown after the previous non-legume crop of pearl millet. Double cropping with barley is practised under assured soil moisture. The role of continuous crop cover on saline soils to keep the salinity away is well established. Under saline-cum-shallow water-table conditions, a crop rotation with rice—barley—cowpea (fodder) is highly profitable in keeping the surface salinity under control. On soils infested with nematodes, rotation of barley with non- host crops, e.g. sunflower, for at least | to 2 years would reduce the nematode population. At higher elevations, wherever barley is harvested by July-August, an early-maturing buckwheat is grown as a second crop. In Kashmir valley, paddy is the main kharif crop and the fields remain fallow during rabi. “Barley can fit well in rotation with paddy in this region. Due to its extreme adaptation and inherently hardier nature, barley can be grown in mixture with other rabi crops, e.g. wheat, gram, peas and lentil, thus it provides insurance cover under rainfed conditions.

Sowing time

Barley can be grown under a wide range of sowing dates determined by differences in latitude, altitude, climatic conditions and cropping systems. It is the only cereal whose cultivation extends to northern latitudes at 70° N (Norway) and at latitudes up to 5,000 m in the cool arid regions of the Himalayas. As barley requires lesser units of heat to reach its physiological maturity, its cultivation extends to high altitudes where the summers are too cool for the cultivation of rice and maize and too short for the cultivation of wheat and oats. In the plains and up to elevation of 2,300 m in the hills, it is grown as a rabi crop. The normal sowing time extends from middle of October to end of November, depending upon the elevation, temperature, soil type and moisture status. Under irrigated timely sown conditions, barley has an additional niche in areas with saline water for irrigation. Delayed sowings lead to considerable reduction in grain yield and production of poor-quality grains, unfit for malting. Under rainfed conditions, sowing should be completed by the last week of October, when the mean temperature falls to 23° to 25°C. Sowing should be so timed as to ensure the maximum

1025

BARLEY

use of conserved soil moisture as well as to avoid high temperature. Before this time, high temperatures can lead to etiolation and seedling mortality. Under irrigated conditions the ideal time for barley sowing is from first to third week of November. Delay in sowing beyond this time, leads to decline in grain yield through reduction in tiller number and grain weight per spike. It also raises the protein content of the grain, thereby adversely affecting the malting quality. As it is a short-duration crop, with the availability of early-maturing varieties, it can be grown successfully under late-sown conditions to fit into cropping patterns, particularly after very late harvest of the preceding crops, viz. paddy, cotton and potato, up to the end of December to first week of January. It is possible for barley in the plains of Bihar, eastern Uttar Pradesh, Punjab and West Bengal. At elevations above 2,300 m, barley is grown as an irrigated crop in spring season. The sowing time extends from the end of April to the end of May, depending on factors, viz. the time of melting of snow from the fields, suitable soil temperature to ensure good germination and stand and availability of irrigation water. In the Nilgiris and Palni hills of Tamil Nadu, it can be grown all the year round. It is sown either in May-June or August-October, depending on the altitude and pattern of rainfall. In the non-traditional hilly areas of North Arcot district of Tamil Nadu with elevation of 600-700 m above mean sea-level, successful crop of barley has been possible during mid-November to mid-February with suitable varieties under irrigation.

Cultivation practices

Cultivation practices for barley are similar to those of wheat, but requiring less inputs. Barley does not require a very fine seed-bed preparation and therefore | ploughing with a soil-turning plough, levelling and 1 harrowing are enough for sowing. Levelling helps in uniform distribution of seed, fertilizer and irrigation water. For raising the crop under drylands, soil-moisture conservation after late monsoon showers during middle of August to end of September, becomes essential. Deep ploughing and discing followed by levelling and bunding should be done after each rain to ensure proper soil moisture for germination and growth under rainfed condition. Under irrigated condition a pre-sowing irrigation is needed to get optimum plant stand. To protect the crop against white ants and soil-borne pests, seed treatment with Chlorpyriphos @ 4.5 ml/kg seed and the seed should be dried overnight prior to sowing, before the last discing. Saline-alkali lands having very shallow ground water-table (1.5 m from ground level) pose a problem of surface salinity. Such lands should be ploughed deep, planked and left undisturbed for a week or a fortnight prior to sowing, so that the salts move from lower soil layers to the upper soil zone and the lower layers where seeds and fertilizers are to be placed (root zone) become relatively free from salts. Barley needs a slightly loose seed-bed like wheat. Soils infested with nematodes require 2 to 3 deep summer ploughings to reduce their populations. Crop rotations may be adjusted in such a manner that the nematode-infested soils are not cultivated with any cereal for 3 years.

Seed treatment and disease and pest control: Disease-free crops of barley can be obtained by growing resistant varieties or adopting chemical control measures. Covered smut and loose smut can be controlled by seed treatment with either of Vitavax, Benlate and Bavistin @ 2 g/kg seed before planting. Dry seed treatment with 0.25% Carboxin

1026

would control loose smut. Seed treatment with Vitavax and Thiram in 1:1 ratio or Raxil @ 1.5 g/kg seed, should be used to control the covered smut and leaf stripe. Seed treatment with Oxycarboxin 0.25% is recommended for the control of yellow Tust. However, good number of improved yellow rust-resistant varieties are now available and can substitute the expensive chemical control.

Powdery mildew caused by Erysiphe graminis inflicts heavy damage to barley crop in sub-humid regions of hills and plains. Infection takes place by ascospores and spreads in the form of white or light gray powdery spots on the leaves and during severe infection other plant parts are also affected. Dusting fine sulphur (200 mesh) @ 15-20 kg/ha or 1% Karathane may effectively control the disease. Sprays and soil drench with a number of fungicides are recommended. Growing of powdery mildew- resistant varieties is the economic method to control.

Helminthosporium leaf diseases, caused by the fungus Pyrenophora teres (net blotch), Helminthosporium sorokinianum (spot blotch) and Helminthosporium gramineum (stripe disease) inflict severe damage to barley crop. Net blotch forms scattered, oblong dark brown reticulate blotches on the leaves giving a netted appearance and affects the floral bracts as well.

Spot blotch affects all parts of the plant. Infected seedlings have brown to black lesions progressing upwards with round to oblong shape and coalesce to form blotches; infected leaves dry up and die.

Stripe disease occurs only on barley as a serious disease in India. Stripes originate from infected seedlings first as long pale green colour stripes turning into brown or even dark brown stripes and dry up with no seed formation. Usually all leaves of the infected plants are affected and may split the leaf blade in severe infection. Diseased plants should be rouged. Helminthosporium leaf diseases can be effectively controlled by spraying with copper fungicides or Dithane Z-78. Seed treatment with organomercurials before sowing can contain the infection. Growing of resistant varieties is by far the most economical control measure.

Among the insect pests, aphid (Rhopalosiphum maidis) is the most serious pest of barley. Spray of Methyl demeton 25 gc or Dimethoate 30 Ec at 1,000 ml/ha or Imidacloprid 200 st at 100 ml/ha should be applied in 200-250 litres of water per ha. Systemic granular insecticides, viz. Phorate 10% or Disulfoton 5% should be used in seed furrows @ 0.5 to 1 kg a.i/ha to control the pest. A number of aphid-tolerant varieties of barley are available and these can be used.

Seed rate: Seed rate varies depending on the availability of soil moisture and the extent to which the soil is affected by abiotic stresses at the sowing time. An optimum plant population per unit area is a prerequisite for maximizing the utilization efficiency of different production inputs. Agronomic experiments conducted under the All-India Co-ordinated Barley Improvement Project indicated that a seed rate of 75-80 kg/ha may be used for irrigated timely sown, whereas a seed rate of 100 kg/ha is suitable for irrigated late-sown and saline-alkaline soils. For rainfed areas, a seed rate of 80-100 kg/ha should be used depending on soil-moisture status at the sowing. In the cool arid region of Ladakh a higher seed rate of 250-300 kg/ha may be used. These rates under different conditions will suffice on using healthy seed possessing very high germination percentage. A slightly higher seed rate is needed for bold-seeded varieties than for small-seeded ones.

1027

Method of sowing: Seeds are sown either by broadcasting or with a single-tube drill (pora, magha or sadde). Broadcast method (chhita) is followed in eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and diara lands (after recession of floods). Broadcasting is also sometimes done on dry seed-bed roughed by a single light discing followed by | pre- emergence irrigation; the practice with least tillage for a hardy crop like barley. The improved method of sowing seeds in rows by using pora method or a seed drill ensures uniform seed placement and stand, less lodging and better management of weeds. The suggested spacing between rows is 22-23 cm under irrigated condition and 23-28 cm under rainfed condition. The optimum seed depth for sowing is 3-5 cm under irrigation and 5-8 cm under rainfed condition, depending on the initial soil moisture. In clay soils with tendency to crust, shallow planting is preferable. Deep seeding is detrimental, and it delays and reduces total emergence.

Manuring: Application of fertilizers and manures to barley crop enables proper utilization of available moisture to exploit full yield potential of a variety. However, rainfed crop of barley is seldom manured directly. It is the preceding kharif crop that receives manure. With major shift in the pattern of cultivation towards more remunerative crops over the past 2 decades, very little or no manuring is normally given to coarse cereal crops including barley. Under specific situation, viz. poor lands devoid of organic matter, with poor water-holding capacity, introduced to barley use, 10-12 cart-loads of decomposed farmyard manure of compost per hectare may be given. Nitrogen fertilization is essential for obtaining high yield from barley crop particularly on soils with lower organic matter, following a non-leguminous crop. The

responses to nitrogen depend on the availability of soil moisture. Agronomic experiments indicate that barley responds well to an application of 40-60 kg N/ha under rainfed condition and 60-80 kg under irrigated condition, depending on i : : 4 mal the climate, soil and variety. Appiication of 20 kg/ha to the crop under dryland farming and 40 kg/ha under irrigated condition gives 2-6 q/ha and 7-9 q/ha more yield, respectively, than the unfertilized crops under the 2 conditions.

*Soil testing is recommended for exact dose of K,O (muriate of potash).

Good response to phosphorus up to 30 kg/ha was obtained under irrigated condition (Table 32.3.1).

To maximize the efficiency of nitrogenous fertilizers under rainfed condition, full amount of nitrogen, similar to that for phosphorus and potassium, should be placed 8— 10 cm deep in the soil at sowing time. Experiments have indicated that if the fertilizers in rainfed barley are placed in furrows 1 month before sowing (just before cessation of monsoon rains) instead of at sowing time, grain yields can be increased by 11%. For irrigated barley, split application of nitrogen, i.e. half dose of nitrogen + full dose of PO, at sowing time and the remaining half N with the first irrigation as top-dressing, is advantageous. Excess of nitrogen can cause lodging, increase protein content in the grain and adversely affect the malting and brewing quality. Nitrogen fertilization of

1028

malting barley is a critical factor, and it should not be done during grain-development Stages. In areas with moderately saline (ECe 6-12 mmhos/cm)-cum-shallow water- table (1.5 m from surface), the entire dose of fertilizer (60 kg N + 30 kg P,O, + 30 kg K,O/ha) may be placed at 10-20 cm depth at the sowing, for getting maximum grain production when compared with other rabi cereals.

Irrigation schedule: Barley is generally grown either on conserved soil moisture from the preceding monsoon season or under restricted irrigation. It responds to irrigation in the drier areas and soils with low moisture-retention capacity. Usually it needs 2-3 irrigations. One or two extra irrigations are needed on sandy soils. Light and frequent irrigations to barley on sandy soils are more advantageous than few heavy irrigations. Waterlogging in the field must be avoided as it causes severe yellowing as well as reduction in tillering. Barley has 3 critical growth stages for irrigation, viz. active tillering stage (30-35 days after sowing), flag-leaf stage (60-65 days after sowing) and milk stage (80-85 days after sowing). Active tillering stage is the most critical. Depending upon the availability of irrigation water, its efficiency can be increased by proper timing of its applicaton at critical stages of crop growth. If only 1 irrigation is available, it should be applied at active tillering stage. If 2 irrigations are available, one should be applied at active tillering stage and the other at the flowering stage. On saline-alkaline soils, frequent light irrigations give better results than fewer heavy irrigations.

Interculture: Weeds generally pose greater problem in irri gated areas, though barley is known to be a good competitor of weeds. Both broad-leaf weeds (e.g. Chenopodium album) and narrow-leaf weeds (e.g. Phalaris minor and Avena ludoviciana) are common in barley. The weed population also depends on the extent of tillage practices followed prior to sowing of barley crop. To prevent losses from weeds, 1 hand-hoeing after first irrigation is quite useful. The use of weed-free seed and a well-prepared seed-bed are essential for effective control of weeds. Weeds can be controlled by application of suitable weedicides. A spray application of 2, 4-D @ 0.5 kg a.i/ha in 400 litres of water or Metsulfuron 30-35 days after sowing is effective in controlling the broad- leaf weeds. Wild oats and Phalaris minor can be controlled by pre-sowing application of Pendimethalin @ 1.0-1.5 kg a.i./ha on prepared top soil. Isoproturon @ 0.75 kg/ha can also be used as post-emergent weedicide at 30-35 days after sowing for the control of grassy weeds. For the control of complex weed flora 2, 4-D and Metsulfuron can be applied as tank mix application with Isoproturon as post-emergent weedicides.

Harvesting, threshing and yield: The harvesting time depends on the total duration of crop in a tract. Harvesting in the plains of Jammu, Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and western Uttar Pradesh takes place from third week of March to middle of April. In Madhya Pradesh, southern and eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Orissa and West Bengal it starts 7 to 10 days earlier. In Maharashtra, Gujarat, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu (North Arcot, low hills), it can be harvested by the first week of February. In the hills, where it is grown in rabi, the harvesting time varies from the end of April to end of May, depending upon the altitude. The spring-sown crop is harvested from the end of July to the end of September. In the Nilgiri and Palni hills in southern India, the summer crop sown in May-June is harvested by September—October. In the higher altitudes of Leh and Kargil in Jammu and Kashmir, a short-duration crop planted in May can be harvested by end of August to first week of September. The method of

1029

BARLEY

harvesting is similar to that of wheat. The harvesting is usually done by sickle, when ripe. Barley is more prone to shattering than wheat. Therefore to prevent losses from shattering, it is useful to cut the crop in the early hours of morning. Harvest it before it is dead ripe. In the plains the threshing was done by treading the dry produce under the feet of cattle or by running the tractor over the heaps of harvested crop but now the use of the tractor-operated threshers is common. The crop with large areas is also harvested with combine by the more progressive farmers. Special care is needed to ensure least skinning and breaking of barley grain during threshing by adjusting the speed of thresher. The average yield of rainfed crop ranges between 2,000 and 2,500 kg/ha, whereas that of irrigated crop is twice as much. Under favourable conditions of manuring and management practices, improved varieties are capable of giving grain yield of 5—6 tonnes/ha under irrigated timely sown conditions, from 3 to 3.5 tonnes/ha under late-sown conditions and from 2.5 to 3 tonnes/ha under rainfed conditions.

Storage

The grain should be thoroughly dried before storage. The store-rooms, storage-pits or bins should be moisture proof as barley is hygroscopic and should be fumigated to keep away the stored-grain pests. Grains stored with more than 14% moisture become warm and deteriorate and thus become unsuitable for malting.

Grading and marketing

Grading and marketing standards are usually established by the government agencies in each country to provide a method to differentiate the quality and value of the produce. At present there are no commonly recognized standards of quality in the internal market in our country and grading is not strictly practised. However, there are well-set grade requirements for both 6-rowed and 2-rowed barleys in many other parts of the world. These grades are based on minimum and maximum limits for a number of factors, viz. percentage of healthy bold grains, proportion of damaged kernels, foreign matter, other grains, and the skinned and broken grains. Bold grains free from undesirable factors are preferred for industrial utilization and consumption and fetch a higher premium. There are very well-recognized and well-defined grade standards for good malting-quality barleys. For the manufacture of pearl barley, bright-coloured, bold and plump grains of uniform size of 2-rowed barleys are preferably used.

BARLEY AS A FODDER CROP

Barley is inherently equipped to produce profuse vegetative growth under limited inputs of fertilizers and irrigation with a remarkable regeneration capacity. It is known to produce fodder/forage of high nutritive quality compared to those of other small grains such as wheat, oats and triticale grown during the rabi season. With the expansion of dairy industry in the country it can supplement the increasing demand for fodder/ feed during the lean periods. The other green fodder crops during the season are berseem and oats which need frequent irrigations and are not available under water scarcity conditions. Some of the varieties developed under the All-India Co-ordinated Barley Improvement Project (AICBIP) for high grain yield have also the capacity to produce high fodder yields and are listed in Table 32.3.2. Continued research efforts made and the progress under the national barley improvement programme indicate barley as an

1030

ideal dual-purpose fodder-cum-grain crop. Some of the recently developed varieties, namely RD 2035 and RD 2552, have been reported to give green fodder yields of 282 and 268 q/ha with one cut at around 55 days after planting; the ratoon crop produces around 22-23 q/ha of grain yield. Research reports on a number of Indian barleys including Kedar (DL 36) indicate high fodder potential of barley—this variety produced green fodder of 420 q/ha, dry matter yield of 65 q/ha, digestible dry matter yield of 11 q/ha and protein yield of 28 q/ha. Cultivators can take advantage of improved varieties and fodder production technology.

PEARL BARLEY

The pearly round fine central starchy endosperm portion obtained by abrasive process (pearling) from the bold plump mealy and uniform white barley grains preferably of 2-row types, is called pearled barley. The pearler consists of abrasive discs that revolve within the perforated cylinder and grind off the hulls and outer layers of the kernel. It is designed to keep the grain turing for uniform removal of the hull, the pericarp and the small portion of endosperm. The machine runs on the batch principle and is automatically controlled. Barley grain is pearled for 2-3 minutes and the material is transferred to a screen to separate the hulls and fine particles. The partly dehulled grain is cooled and rerun through the same steps. After three pearlings the hull and most of the bran would have been removed. The barley is graded and is branded as pot barley used in dressing, soups and flours. After 56 pearlings all the kernal coatings, the embryos and the outer layers of the starchy endosperm are removed and the pearly (rounded) product is marketed as pearl barley. Byproducts of the pearling process include the ground roughages and the flour. The flour is put to various human uses and the rest of the ground materials can be used for animal feed. Pearled barley can be used for making powdered products and barley water valued for diuretic and convalescent people.

PRODUCTION OF BARLEY FOR MALTING

For malting, fully matured, healthy, medium-size, plump, uniform, mellow grains free from cuts and blemishes and possessing a bright golden colour with 100% viability, and with a nitrogen content less than 2% preferably between 1.2 and 1.4% on dry- weight basis, are regarded suitable. The proper choice of a variety is the single most important criterion, followed by special management practices essential for producing good-malting quality barley. Although it is hard to get perfect grain, it is important to understand the major factors in the selection of barleys for good malting and brewing qualities. There are a number of important parameters of barley grain and malt that influence the malting and brewing qualities. The national core group on malt barley

development (NCGMBD) under the auspices of the Directorate of Wheat Research (ICAR), Karnal, gave guidelines on selection of good-malting quality barley based on grain and malt parameters for 6-rowed and 2-rowed types. These guidelines were revised during the 43 Annual Meeting of the AICW&BIP held at LARI, New Delhi during August 2004, with minor changes. As most of the barley varieties grown in India are of 6-rowed type, and their grain-yield levels are higher than those of available 2-rowed types, cultivators cannot afford to sacrifice on yield unless paid a premium for 2-rowed types. The recently developed 2-rowed varieties like DWR 28 have bridged

1031

Barley-grain parameters for 6-rowed and 2-rowed types in India

(i) | Moisture (%)

(ii) Kernel shape

(iii) Kernel size

(v) 1,000-kernel weight (g)

(vi) | Husk content (%)

(vii) Protein content (d.b.)

(viii) | Germination capacity

(ix) | Germinative energy (72 hrs)

(x) Beta glucans

(xi) Dormancy

Standard parameters for barley malt in 2-row and 6-row types in India

the yield gap between the 2-rowed malt type and 6-rowed grain barleys to a great extent. The specified limits for barley grain and major malt parameters are given here. These parameters for 2-rowed types are also more or less similar to those of the 6- rowed for a majority of the traits except kernel size on 2.5 mm (90%), 1,000-kernel weight (> 45 g) and protein content (9.0-11.0%, d.b.).

The malting quality parameters for 6-rowed and 2-rowed barleys are mostly similar except protein, malt extract and diastatic power. Although the barley ‘grain’ and ‘malt’ factors are varietal features, the proper choice of a variety and follow up of special management procedures are essential for producing good malting barley. No specific varieties were grown in the country for malting in the past and the commercial 6- rowed types with bold plump kernels were preferred. The southern Haryana, northern Rajasthan and adjoining areas of western Uttar Pradesh and southern Punjab with relatively cool dry climate, sandy soils, shorter vegetative phase and availability of longer cool period for grain filling are considered suitable for malt barley production. The work on varietal improvement for malting has been intensified under the All- India Co-ordinated Wheat and Barley Improvement Project, DWR, Karnal (ICAR). A number of 6-rowed and a few 2-rowed barleys have also been released for malting

1032

NORTH-WESTERN PLAINS

1033

BARLEY

1034

1034 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

(Table 32.3.2 continued)

NORTH-EASTERN PLAINS

CENTRAL PLAINS

BARLEY

1035

PENINSULAR PLAINS ZONE

1036

purpose (Table 32.3.2). Some of the major production practices for realizing high grain yield and good malting quality are given here for use of the cultivators. Sowing the crop at the optimum time for tract (from the end of October to mid-November) assures fully ripe and well-developed grains. With delayed sowing, drought, diseases, or premature harvesting, the grains are likely to become steely and unfit for malting. The choice of an extremely fertile soil or excessive application of nitrogenous fertilizers to the crop should be avoided, since lodging may occur and the content of husk and protein in the grain may increase. Time of application of nitrogen is a critical factor for malting barley and half of the recommended N dose should be applied at the time of planting along with P and K and remaining half at first irrigation. Nitrogen application should not be done during grain-development stages. For better grain yield and malting quality, an application of 80 kg N+40 kg P,O,+20 kg K,O/ha was found to be adequate in the north-western plains where the grain protein remains under desirable limits. The requirement of K,O will depend on the soil-test value. Extreme care should be taken during harvesting, processing and storing of the grains to avoid skinning and breaking.

Varieties

For realizing maximum grain yields, the selection of a proper variety for a given region is of paramount importance. The All-India Co-ordinated Research Project on Barley Improvement presently AICW&BIP, DWR, Karnal has since its inception devoted efforts to develop improved varieties for human consumption (hull-less), dual- purpose fodder-cum-grain types for animal (feed or fodder), and 2-rowed and 6-rowed hulled types for malting and brewing industry. It is interesting to note that the 2-row malting barley, namely, DWR 28 has been reported to be giving comparable yields with those of the good malting 6-row varieties such as K 551 and RD 2503 (Table 32.3.2). This is an encouraging feature for barley cultivators and the malting industry in the country. Nevertheless, adequate attention has been paid to breed for genetic resistance to important diseases and abiotic stresses, viz. salinity-alkalinity, in some of the newly improved varieties.

1037

HBL 56 an Indian barley was released by Nepal Government for the country. Keeping in view the national priorities, rapid progress has since been made in the development of semi-dwarf and medium-tall varieties capable of giving 5-6 tonnes grain/ha with moderate levels of fertility and irrigation. Varieties are now available to cater to almost all the plains and hill zones of the country. Barley improvement in this country has witnessed a kind of significant advance in terms of reconstruction of a plant type responsive to inputs, with yield potential of 5-6 tonnes/ha. Varieties released for cultivation under different agro-climatic conditions are listed in Table 32.3.2.

Quantum jumps in future barley yields can be expected with the exploitation of high heterosis available in this crop. There is optimism with the existence of a viable, practically feasible and economical hybrid production mechanism — the CMS — Restorer system already reported and also used with some degree of success under the AICBIP, for exploitation of hybrid vigour.

Maize (Zea mays) is the most versatile crop with wider adaptability in varied agro- ecologies. It has highest genetic yield potential among the foodgrain crops. Globally, it is cultivated on nearly 150 million hectares in about 160 countries having wider diversity of soil, climate, biodiversity and management practices that contribute nearly 37 % (782 million tonnes) in the global grain production. The United States of America (USA) has the highest harvest of maize in the world that contributes nearly 20 % of the total production in the world and is the driver of the US economy. The other major countries that contribute significantly to the global maize production are China, Brazil, Mexico, India and Indonesia. The USA has the highest average productivity (> 9.6 tonnes/ha) which is double than the global average productivity (4.92 tonnes/ha). The average productivity in Argentina, China, Brazil, Mexico and India are 6.47, 4.85, 3.7, 2.53 and 2.43 tonnes/ha respectively.

In India, maize is the third most important food crop after rice and wheat. It is cultivated in 8.12 million hectares (2007-08) under a wide range of agro-ecological situations. It contributes nearly 8 % in the national food basket and more than Rs 100 billion to the agricultural GDP at current prices apart from providing employment to over 100 million man-days at the farm and downstream agricultural and industrial sectors. In addition to staple food for human being and quality feed for animals, maize serves as a basic raw material as an ingredient to thousands of industrial products that includes starch, oil, protein, alcoholic beverages, food sweeteners, pharmaceutical, cosmetic, film, textile, gum, package and paper industries etc.

Recent trends in growth rate (2003-04 to 2007-08) of area (2.6%), production (6.4%) and productivity (3.6%) of maize in India have been very impressive and maize experienced highest growth rate among the food crops. Since 1950-51, the area, production and productivity of maize have increased by more than 2.5, 11 and 4 times from 3.2 million hectares, 1.7 million tonnes and 547 kg/ha to current level of 8.12 million hectares, 19.77 million tonnes and 2,435 kg/ha, respectively, owing to increasing demand of maize for diversified purposes. In India, the maize is used as human food (25%), poultry feed (49%), animal feed (12%), industrial (starch) products (12%), beverages and seed (1% each). With the increasing trends of maize production, the projected demand of maize (22.73 million tonnes) by the end of XI Five-Year plan (2011-12) will be achieved through improved maize production technologies focused on ‘Single Cross Hybrids’.

The maize is cultivated throughout the year in different parts of the country for various purposes including grain, fodder, green cobs, sweet com, baby corn, pop comm etc. The major maize-growing states that contribute more than 80% of the total maize- production are Andhra Pradesh (20.9 %), Karnataka (16.5%), Rajasthan (9.9 %), Maharashtra (9.1%), Bihar (8.9%), Uttar Pradesh (6.1 %), Madhya Pradesh (5.7 %), and Himachal Pradesh (4.4 %). Hence, the maize has emerged as an important crop in the non-traditional regions, i.e. peninsular India wherein the state like Andhra Pradesh

1039

which ranks fifth in acreage (0.79 million hectare) has recorded highest production (4.14 million tonnes) and productivity (5.26 tonnes/ha) in the country.

Origin and history

The history of maize is about 7,000 years old. The exact proginators of maize are still uncertain but it is considered that teosinte, a wild grass, is one of the proginators. Modern archeological and genetic studies revealed that teosinte was first domesticated in southern Mexico around 4,000 to 3,000 sc. During 1400 Bc, corn cultivation started in both Mexican coasts. Native Americans classified the major lineages of corn, viz. dent, flint, flour, pop, and sweet corn. The American Indians treated it as cereal and started eating. The corn derived from Indo-european word which mean small nugget. When English and German settlers arrived in the new world they referred maize as corn. They distinguished it from other grains by calling it Indian corn. The origin of the word maize is believed to be from Taino people in Northern Antilles island (near present day San Salvador). The word Taino means mahis which was considered as source of life. Over the time the mahis word transmutated into maize.

Suitable areas for cultivation

Maize is a versatile crop that can be successfully grown in varied agro-ecologies ranging from sea level to high altitudes of up to 3,000 m. In India, it is cultivated in all the states except Kerala.

Soils

Maize can be grown successfully in wide range of soils ranging from loamy sand to clay loam. However, soils with good organic matter content having high water- holding capacity with neutral pH are considered good for higher productivity. Being a sensitive crop to moisture stress particularly excess soil moisture and salinity stresses; it is desirable to avoid low-lying fields having poor drainage and also the field having higher salinity. Therefore, the fields having provision of proper drainage should be selected for cultivation of maize.

Selection of cultivars

Selection of cultivar suited to particular agro-ecological condition, maturity, season and purpose is the key for getting potential productivity of crop. It is always better to select a “Single Cross Hybrid” developed and released for a set of climatic condition. The single cross hybrids also performs better even under the stress environments. However in area where, hybrid seed availability cannot be ensured like high altitude and tribal regions, high yield potential composite varieties can be grown. Therefore, the choice of cultivar should be in accordance to yield potential and purpose for which it is to be grown. Several hybrids and composite varieties of different maturity groups for various purposes have been developed and released in India which are listed in Table 32.4.1. Hybrids of different maturity groups for kharif season, hybrids of late maturity for rabi season and hybrids of early maturity for spring season should be preferred for maize cultivation.

Time of sowing

The maize can be grown round the year in all seasons, viz. kharif (monsoon), post- monsoon, rabi (winter) and spring. For higher productivity particularly in kharif season,

1040

1042

1043

the farmers having sufficient irrigation facilities, it is desirable to complete the sowing 12-15 days prior to onset of monsoon. However, in rainfed areas, the sowing time should be coincided with onset of monsoon. The optimum time of sowing in different seasons are given in Table 32.4.2,

Rabi Last week of October for intercropping and first fortnight of November for sole crop Spring First week of February

Seed rate and plant geometry

Optimum plant density is the key for achieving higher productivity and resource- use efficiency. The seed rate depends on purpose, seed size, plant type, season, sowing methods, planter etc. For different purposes of maize cultivation, the following crop geometry and seed rate should be adopted (Table 32.4.3).

Seed treatment

To protect the crop from seed and major soil-borne diseases and insect-pests, it is always advisable to treat the seed with fungicides and insecticides before sowing as per the details given in Table 32.4.4.

Tillage and crop establishment

Tillage and crop establishment is the key for achieving the optimum plant population that governs the crop yield. Though the crop establishment is a series of events (seeding, germination, emergence and final establishment) that depends on interactions of seed, seedling depth, soil moisture, method of sowing, machinery etc., but the method of planting is important parameter for proper crop establishment under a set of crop- growing situation. Mainly the maize is sown directly through seed using different methods of tillage and establishment but during winter where fields are not vacated in time (till November), transplanting can be done successfully by raising the nursery. However, the method of sowing (establishment) depends on season, cropping system, soil conditions, etc. For different situations, the sowing methods are described here.

Raised bed (ridge) planting: In general, the raised bed planting is best planting method for maize during monsoon and winter seasons both under excess moisture as well as limited irrigation availability conditions. Sowing should be done on the southem side of the east-west ridges/beds, which helps in good germination. Planting should be done at proper spacing. Preferably, the raised bed planter having inclined plate, cupping or roller type seed metering systems should be used for planting that facilitates in placement of seed and fertilizers at proper place in one operation which helps in getting good crop stand, higher productivity and resource-use efficiency. Using raised bed planting technology, 20-30 % irrigation water can be saved with higher productivity. Moreover, under temporary excess soil moisture/waterlogging due to heavy rains, the furrows will act as drainage channels and crop can be saved from excess soil-moisture stress. For realizing the full potential of the bed planting technology, permanent beds are advisable wherein sowing can be done in a single pass without any preparatory tillage. Permanent beds are also beneficial under excess soil moisture situations as the infiltration rate is much higher and crop can be saved from the temporary waterlogging injury.

Zero-till planting: Maize can be successfully grown without any preparatory tillage under no-till situation with less cost of cultivation, higher profitability and better resource-use efficiency. Under such condition one should ensure good soil moisture at sowing and seed and fertilizers should be placed in band using zero-till seed-cum- fertilizer planter. The technology is in place with large number of farmers particularly under rice-maize and maize-wheat systems in peninsular and eastern India. However, use of appropriate planter having suitable furrow opener and seed metering system is the key of success of the no-till technology.

Conventional/reduced till flat planting: Under heavy weed infestation where herbicidal weed management is not economical in no-till planting and also for rainfed areas where crop is taken on conserved moisture, flat planting can be done using seed- cum-fertilizer planters.

Furrow planting: During spring season evaporative losses of water from the soil under flat as well as raised bed planting is higher and hence crop suffers due to moisture stress. Under such a situation, it is always advisable to grow maize in furrows for proper crop establishment, growth, and higher productivity.

Transplanting: Under intensive cropping systems where fields are not vacated in time for planting of winter maize, the chances of delayed planting exist. Under such a situation establishment is a problem due to low temperature. Therefore, transplanting

1045

is an alternative and well established technique for winter maize. Therefore, for the situation where fields are vacated during December-January, it is advisable to grow nursery and transplant the seedlings in furrows and apply irrigation water for proper establishment. Using this technique, temporal isolation can also be maintained in maize- growing regions for purity and good quality of seed production as well as quality protein maize grain. For | ha, 700 m? area is required for nursery. The nursery should be raised during the second fortnight of November. The age of seedling depends on growth but in general seedling attained a height of 15 cm should be transplanted during December-January.

Nutrient management

Maize in general and hybrids in particular are very responsive to nutrients. Besides chemical fertilizers, it is very responsive to organic manures. The application of nutrients depends mainly on soil-nutrient status and cropping system. For getting desirable yields, the nutrient applications should be done in such a way that matched the soil supplying capacity and plant demand (site-specific nutrient-management approach) keeping in view of the preceding crop (cropping system). The maize in general responds well to organic manures and hence integrated nutrient management (INM) is very important nutrient management strategy in maize production systems. Therefore, for higher economic yield of maize, application of 10 tonnes FYMbha, 10- 15 days prior to sowing supplemented with

Water management

The water management depends on season as about 80 % of maize is cultivated during monsoon season, particularly under rainfed conditions. However, in areas where assured irrigation facilities are available, depending upon the rains and moisture- holding capacity of the soil, irrigation should be applied at critical stages. Young seedlings, knee high stage (V,), flowering (V,) and grain filling (GF) are the most sensitive stages for moisture stress and hence irrigation should ensured at these stages. First irrigation should be applied very carefully wherein water should not overflow on the ridges/beds. In general, the irrigation should be applied in furrows up to two- thirds height of the ridges/beds. In raised bed planting system and limited irrigation water availability conditions, the irrigation water can also be applied in alternate furrow to save more irrigation water. In rainfed areas, tied-ridges are helpful in conserving the rainwater for its availability in the root zone for longer period. For winter maize, it is advisable to keep soil wet (frequent and mild irrigation) during 15 December to 15 February to protect the crop from frost injury.

1046

Weed management

Weeds are the serious problem in maize, particularly in monsoon season that competes with crop for nutrient, water and other resources and causes yield loss up to 35%. Therefore, timely weed management is needed for achieving higher yield. Atrazine is a selective and broad-spectrum herbicide for maize that checks the emergence of wide spectrum of weeds. Pre-emergence application of Atrazine @ of 1.0-1.5 kg a.i./ha in 600 litres water gives effective control of weeds. During spraying, the person who is doing spray should move backward so, that the Atrazine film on the soil surface may not be disturbed, Preferably three boom flat-fan nozzle should be used for proper ground coverage and saving time. One to two hoeings are recommended for aeration and uprooting of the remaining weeds, if any. It is always advisable to move backward during hoing operation to avoid compaction and provide better aeration in root zone. For areas where zero tillage is practiced, pre-plant application (10-15 days prior to seeding) of non-selective herbicides, viz. Glyphosate @ 1.0 kg a.i-/ha in 400-600 litres water or Paraquat @ 0.5 kg a.i/ha in 600 litres water is recommended to control the weeds. Under heavy weed infestation, post-emergence application of Paraquat can also be done as protected spray using hoods.

Crop protection

Insect-pest management: Stalk borer is the major pest problem of maize in India. Chilo partellus, popularly known as stalk borer that occurs during monsoon season, is a serious pest throughout the country. Chilo lays eggs 10-25 days after germination on lower side of the leaves. The larva of the Chilo enters in the whorl and cause damage in the leaves. And Sesamia inference, the another borer, occurs during winter season particularly in peninsular India where winter maize is important crop. The moth of the Sesamia is nocturnal and lays eggs on lower leaf sheath. The larvae of the Sesamia enter the plant near the base and cause damage to stem.

For control of Chilo and Sesamia, foliar spray of 0.1 % Endosulfan [700 ml (35 Ec) in 250 litre water] 10 days after germination is effective. The Chilo can also be controlled by release of 8 Trichocards (Jrichogramma chilonis)/ha 10 days after germination. Intercropping of cowpea with maize is an eco-friendly option for reducing the incidence of Chilo on maize.

Termite is also an important pest in many areas. For control of termite, Fipronil granules should be applied @ 20 kg/ha followed by light irrigation. If the termite incidence is in pathches, Fepronil should be applied as spot application @ 2-3 granules/ plant.

Disease management: There are several diseases of maize that occurs during different seasons in various parts of the country that lead to heavy yield loss if not managed properly in time. In India, the major maize diseases cause an average yield loss of 13.2% of which foliar diseases (5 %), stalk rots, root rots, ear rots (5 %) cause major yield losses. For reduction of incidence of diseases, resistant varieties/hybrids should be grown. The major diseases and their management practices are described here.

Turcicum /eaf blight: This disease is distributed in Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim, West Bengal, Meghalaya, Tripura, Asom, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. At its appreance, it shows

1047

long, elliptical, grayish-green or tan lesions ranging from 2.5 to 15 cm in length on the leaves. For control of TLB, spray Zineb/Maneb @ 2.5-4.0 g/litre of water (2-4 applications) at 8-10 days interval. The crop debris should be ploughed down.

Maydis leaf blight: This disease also occurs in wide range of maize growing states like Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Meghalaya, Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. It shows the symptoms as lesions on the leaves elongated between the veins, tan, 2-6 mm x 3-22 mm with limited margins having buff to brown borders. For effective control of this disease, spray of Dithane Z-78 or Zineb @ 2.4 — 4.0 g/litre water (2-4 applications) at 8-10 days interval after first appearance of symptoms of disease. In addition, the crop debris should be ploughed down.

Polysora rust: This disease appears mainly in peninsular India, i.e Andhra Pradesh, Kamataka and Tamil Nadu. The main symptoms of the disease shows appearance of circular to elongate light cinnamon brown and circular to oval 0.2-2.0 mm long densely scattered legions on the upper leaf. The uredospores are yellowish to golden. For effective control of polysora rust, three sprays of Dithane M-45 @ 2-2.5 g/litre beginning from first appearance of symptoms at 15 days interval are required.

Banded leaf and sheath blight: This disease mainly occurs in Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. At appearance of the disease, white lesions develops on leaves and sheath. Purplish or brown horizontal bands present on white lesions characterize the disease. Seed treatment with peat-based formulation (Pseudomonas fluorescence) @ 16 g/kg seed or as soil application @ 7g/litre water (soil drenching) or foliar spray of Sheethmar (Validamycin) @ 2.7 ml /litre water provides effective control of the disease. Stripping of 2 lower leaves along with leaf sheath also gives effective control of the disease.

Post-flowering stalk rot: Post-flowering stalk rot occurs mainly in Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Andhra Pradesh. Disease appears when the crop enters in senescence phase. The pathogen commonly affects the root-crown regions and lower internodes. At opening of split of stalk, it shows pink-purple discolouration. For effective control of the disease, water stress at flowering should be avoided. Biocontrol agent— Trichoderma formulation mixed with FYM @ 10/kg should be inculated after covering with wet gunny bags for 10 days. This mixture should be applied in the furrows before sowing. It is always advisable to practice crop rotation to minimize the disease incidence.

Downy mildews: Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim, West Bengal, Meghalaya, Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat are prone to downy mildews. The main symptoms of downy mildew are legends developing on lower leaves as narrow chlorosis strips. Strips extend in parallel fashion with well- defined margined delineated by veins. Downy whitish to creamy growth usually on the ventral surface of the infected leaves appears corresponding to strips. For control of downy mildew, the infected plants should be rogue out and destroyed. The planting of crop before onset of rains minimizes the incidence of mildew. Seed treatment with fungicides like Apron 35 ws @ 2.5 g/kg seed is advantageous.

1048

Quality protein maize, Speciality and other corn types

Other than grain, maize is also cultivated for various purposes like quality protein maize and other special purposes known as Speciality Corn. The various speciality com types are quality protein maize (QPM), baby corn, sweet corn, pop corn, waxy corn, high oil com, etc. In India, QPM, baby corm and sweet corn are being popularized and cultivated by the large number of farmers. Different types of speciality corn are given here alongwith the specific cultivars (Table 34.4.6).

Baby corn HM 4; VL Baby Corn 1(composite)

Quality Protein Maize (QPM): As more than 85% of the maize is used directly for food and feed, the quality has a great role for food and nutritional security in the country. In this respect, discovery of Opaque-2 (O-2) mutant had opened tremendous possibilities for improvement of protein quality of maize which later led to the development of Quality Protein Maize (QPM). QPM which is nutritionally superior to normal maize is the new mantra to signify its importance not only for food and nutritional security but also for quality feed for poultry and animal sectors. Quality Protein Maize has specific features of having balanced amount of amino acids with high content of lysine and tryptophan and low content of leucine and isoleucine. The balanced proportion of all these essential amino acid in Quality Protein Maize enhances the biological value of protein. The biological value of protein in QPM is just double than that of normal maize protein which is very close to the milk protein, as the biological value of milk and QPM proteins are 90 and 80 % respectively. Whereas it is less than 50 % in normal maize protein. QPM hybrids of different grain colours have been developed and relased in India (Table 34.4.6) for their cultivation in different agro-climatic conditions of the country. The production technology of QPM is same as of normal grain maize except isolation as to maintain the purity of QPM, it should be grown in isolation with normal maize.

Baby corn: Baby corn is a young finger like unfertilized cobs with 1-3 cm emerged silk preferably harvested within 1-3 days of silk emergence, depending upon the growing season. The desirable size of baby corn is 6 to 11 cm length and 1.0 to 1.5 cm diameter with regular row/ ovule arrangement. The most preferred colour by the consumers / exporters is generally creamish to very light yellow. Baby corn is nutritive and its nutritional quality is at par or even superior to some of the seasonal vegetables. It can be eaten raw as salad and in preparation of different recipes such as chutney, pakora, mix vegetables, pickles, candy, murabba, kheer, halwa, raita, Chinese preparations, etc. Besides proteins, vitamins and iron, it is one of the richest sources

1049

of phosphorus. It is a good source of fibrous protein and easy to digest. It is almost free from residual effects of pesticides. As it can be cultivated round the year, three to four crops of baby corn can be taken in a year. Since cost of cultivation of baby corn in India is lowest in the world, India can become one of the major baby corn producing country. It has great potential both for internal consumption and export.

In general, the cultivation practices of baby corn are similar to grain crop except (i) higher plant population, (ii) higher dose of nitrogen application because of higher plant population, (iii) preference for early-maturing single—cross hybrid and (iv) harvesting within 1-3 days of silk emergence.

Sweet corn: Sweet cor is one of the most popular vegetables in the USA, Europe and other developing countries. It is a very delicious and rich source of energy, vitamins C and A. It is eaten as raw, boiled or steamed green cobs/grain. It is also used in preparation of soup, salad and other recipes. Sweet corn is becoming very popular in urban areas of country; hence its cultivation is remunerative for peri-urban farmers. Besides green cobs, the green fodder is also available to the farmers for their cattle. Generally sweet corn is early in maturity. It is harvested in 70-75 days during kharif season. Green cobs are harvested 18-20 after days of pollination during kharif, but the the duration may vary season to season. At the harvest time the moisture is generally 70 % in the grain and sugar content varies from 11 to more than 20 %. Sweet com is generally dull yellow and white, however dull yellow colour is preferred.

Sweet corn with high sugar content should not be planted when temperature is below 16°C. The picking of sweet corn should be done in the morning or evening. Green cobs should be immediately transported to the cold storage in refrigerated trucks to avoid the conversion of sugar to starch. Exposure to high temperature after picking leads to losses in flavour.

Pop corn: Popcorn is hard endosperm flint maize. It is one of the common snack items in many parts of the world, particularly in cities and is liked because of its light, porous and crunchy texture. The popcorn flour can also be used for preparing many traditional dishes. It is consumed a fresh, as it has to be protected against moisture absorption from the air. Kernels of pop corn are very small and oval/round in shape. When heated at about 170°C, the grains swell and burst, turning inside out. Quality of pop corn depends on popping volume and minimum number of non-popcorn.

Waxy corn: Waxy corn originated in China but largely used in USA. Grain of waxy com gives wax-like appearance and has 100% amylopectin starch. While in normal maize, the starch is nearly 30% amylose and the remaining 70% is amylopectin. Waxy corn is mainly used for food and industrial purposes.

High oil corn: Most of the normal maize lines have 3- 4 % oil content. In general, lines with more than 6 % oil are considered high oil lines. In maize grain, about 95 % of the total oil is in the germ. The oil and starch-contents have inverse relationship as when the oil per cent increases the starch decreases. The wet milling industries are still in advantage with high oil content corn. In the USA, the high oil corn is cultivated on contractual basis and remunerative price is paid to the farmers. In India its cultivation is not economical because it is not sold on premium basis. Generally in normal maize crop, 15-20 % population of high oil hybrids is used as pollen parent and there is detasseling of the normal corn plant. Due to xenia effect there is an increase of oil in normal maize and its cultivation is done in isolation. The corn oil has low content of

1050

saturated fatty acid and is considered to be one of the best quality cooking oil. In India more than 60,000 tonnes of corn oil is made available for various uses.

Fodder maize: Maize fodder can be used at any crop growth stage. Its quality is deteriorated after anthesis. To maintain the fodder quality the detasseling is advised to the farmers for better digestibility and palatability. By grazing this fodder to the milch cattle, their milk is increased. The tall, leafy and longer duration cultivars are most preferred for maize fodder cultivation. The cultivation of maize for fodder can be done round the year. Very high seed rate is used. Generally the farmers grow composite varieties or advance generation of hybrid seed which is economical to the farmers.

Maize-based cropping systems in India

As maize has wide adaptability and compatibility under diverse soil and climatic conditions, itis cultivated in sequence with different crops under various agro-ecologies of the country. It is considered as one of the potential drivers, of crop diversification under different situation. Among different maize-based cropping systems, maize-wheat ranks first having 1.8 million hectare area mainly concentrated in rainfed ecologies. Maize-wheat is the third most important cropping system after rice-wheat and rice- rice that contributes about 3% in the national food basket. The other major maize systems in India are maize-mustard, maize-chickpea, maize-maize, cotton-maize etc. Recently, due to changing scenario of natural resource base, rice-maize has emerged a potential maize-based cropping system in peninsular and eastern India. Studies carried out under various soil and climatic conditions under All-India Co-ordinated Research Project on Cropping Systems revealed that compared to existing cropping systems like rice-wheat and rice-rice, maize-based cropping systems are better user of available resources and the water-use efficiency of maize-based cropping systems was about 100 to 200% higher at different locations. A summary of major maize-based cropping systems in irrigated and rainfed conditions of different agro-climatic zones in India is given in Table 32.4.7.

1051

MAIZE

(Table 32.4.7 concluded)

In peri-urban interface, maize-based high value intercropping systems are gaining importance owing to market driven farming. Further, maize has compatibility with several crops of different growth habit that led to development of various intercropping systems (Table 32.4.8). In intercropping systems, for higher productivity of either of the crops in intercropping system, the nutrients should be applied as per requirement of both the crops. Precautions should be taken in application of herbicides ensuring selectivity of the herbicides.for either of the crops in the system.

1052

Suitable area situation

Intercropping systems

All maize-growing areas

Maize + pigeonpea, Maize + cowpea, Maize + mungbean, Maize + urdbean, Maize + sugarcane, Rice + maize, Maize + soybean

Maize + high value vegetables, Maize + flowers, Baby corn + vegetables, Sweet corn + vegetables

Important considerations in hybrid seed production of maize

For quality and economical seed production of maize hybrids, following considerations are important:

Isolation distance: Seed production should be taken in well-drained, weed-and disease free soil and preferably the fields where preceding crop was not maize to minimize rouging and maintain the genetic purity. At least 400-500 m distance is required between two maize genotypes.

Male: female ratio: The male: female ratio depends on (a) pollen shedding potential of male parent and (b) male: female synchrony. For better seed setting flowering of female should be earlier than male or male pollen dehiscence should coincide with female silking, In general, the male: female ratio should be 1: 2 or 1:3 or 1:4.

Time of sowing: For most part of India, first week of July during kharif and first week of November during rabi are the optimum time of sowing to avoid flowering from heavy rains during kharif and low temperature during winter.

Layout: It is desirable to plant the crop on raised beds (ridges). Optimum row and plant spacing should be kept at 60 and 20 cm respectively. Identification labels/ tags should be put on the male and female lines to distinguish between them.

Seed rate: The seed rate depends on seed size/ test weight, plant type and male: female ratio, However, in general 15 kg/ha for female and 10 kg/ ha for male is recommended.

Removal of off-type plants and thinning: This operation should be ¢arried out at three stages: (i) 12-15 days after sowing to remove off-type and excess plants for maintaining optimum plant density, (ii) at knee high stage all the dissimilar plants should be removed to maintain the purity, and (iii) at flowering all the dissimilar tassel-bearing plant should be removed before anthesis.

Detasseling: Detasseling in female should be done before anthesis. It should be practiced row-wise. One person should follow to monitor the each row to check that no part of the tassel is left inside. The process of detasseling should continue for 8-10 days. While detasseling, leaf should not be removed which will otherwise reduce the photosynthesis. The removal of | to 3 leaves along with tassel reduces 5-15 % yield. The removed tassel should not be thrown in the field but should be fed to the cattle as it is nutritive fodder.

Harvesting: Male parent should be harvested first than the female and should be kept separately. Optimum moisture content in grain at harvesting should be around 20%. The harvested cobs should spread evenly instead of making heap.

1053

MAIZE

Stages of crop inspection: Crop should be inspected

a. At the time of sowing to monitor the land, isolation distance, planting ratio of male: female, proper sowing time, seed treatment.

b. During pre-lowering/vegetative stage to verify the rouging and removal of off- type plants.

c. During flowering stage to check disease and pest infestation.

d. During post-flowering and pre-harvest stage to remove the late and diseased plants.

e. At harvesting time to see the proper time of harvesting.

Drying and sorting of seed parent cobs: The drying of the cobs should not be done either on the flour, rather it should be dried on tarpoline sheets to avoid seed injury, and during night the cobs should be kept covered. To maintain the purity, dissimilar, diseased and pest- infested cobs should be removed before shelling. The female cobs should be dried up to 13-14% moisture content before shelling.

Shelling: Shelling of female parent should be done earlier than male to avoid mechanical mixture. Shelling can be done manually or by power-operated maize sheller. Seed processing: All under size, broken, damaged etc. seeds should be removed for maintaining the quality of seed.

Storage and marketing: Seed drying should be done till the moisture content of the seed is reduced to 8 % and it should be kept in aerated jute bags. Seed should be stored at cool and dry place preferably in cold storage. Poor storage conditions will lead to loss of vigour and poor germination. Marketing should be done with specifications and standards.

Value-addition

Value-addition in maize has a great potential. There are several value-added products of maize particularly QPM and baby corn that not only increase the farm income but also provides employment to rural youth and farm women. Value-added products developed using normal maize, QPM are:

* Traditional productions: /adoo, halva, kheer, chapatti, sev, mathi, pakora, and cheela

* Popped products: popcorn and popped ladoo

* Baked products: bread, non khatai and cake

* Extruded products: vermicelli and pasta

* Convenience foods: instant idli mix, instant dhokla mix, porridege mix and sprouded chat

A wide range of products from baby corn have been developed as mentioned below:

¢ Traditional products; pakoda, cutlet, chat, salad, dry vegetable, kofta, mixed vegetable, raita

* Sweet products: halwa, kheer, burfi

* Preserved products: jam, chutney, pickle, candy, murabba

¢ Chinese products: soup, Manchurian, baby corn chili, chowmin, sweet and sour vegetable.

32.5 Oat

The common oat (Avena sativa) is a cereal crop grown primarily for its grains. Oats are suitable for human consumption and also as livestock feed and fodder. There is currently an increasing interest in the crop in many countries owing to considerable scientific evidence to support its use as food, feed and fodder.

Origin and evolution

Oats (Avena species) belong to family Gramineae / Poaceae. Oat is a crop of Mediterranean origin, its domestication dates back to ancient times. Oat seeds are reportedly found in 4,000-year-old remains in Egypt. Its origin is Asia Minor.

The genus Avena is large and diverse containing both wild and cultivated of polyploid series with a basic chromosome number of n = 7. Three naturally occurring ploidy levels are known within the genus, diploids (2n=2x=14), tetraploids (2n=4x=28) and hexaploids (2n=6x=42).

The cultivated oat Avena sativa (2n=6x =42) is a natural allopolyploid evolved through cycles of interspecific hybridization and polyploidization combining three distinct genomes. Wild species A. sterilis and A. fatua share the same genome as that of A. sativa. The genus Avena comprises about seventy species, a few are cultivated. A. sativa and A. byzantina are the main oat species grown for fodder and grain. A. brevis (short oat), A. nuda (naked oat), A. orientalis are some other grain-yielding species, while A. barbata, A. fatua and A. pratensis are some fodder species.

Oat is a self pollinated crop. Natural cross pollination by wind occurs occasionally and varies from 0.4 to 1.3%. An isolation distance of at least 3 metres all around the seed field from other oat fields is necessary to avoid contamination from other oat varieties.

Distribution

The distribution of wild and weedy species is confined mainly to the temperate northern hemisphere. The countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea, Turkey, Iran, Iraq and parts of former USSR are rich in diversity of species. Oats are grown throughout the temperate zones. Oat has a low summer heat requirement and greater tolerance of rain than other cereals like wheat, rye or barley, and hence is particularly important in areas with cool, wet summers, In India, oat is a crop of minor importance but gradually becoming significant due to its multiple uses. It is grown primarily for fodder in Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Uttarakhand, Rajasthan, Bihar, West Bengal, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu.

Area, production, productivity

Oat ranks sixth in world cereal production, following wheat, maize, rice, barley and sorghum. World oat production is generally concentrated between latitudes 35-

1055

OAT

65°N and 20-46°S. As per FAOSTAT, the area in 2003 under oat cultivation in major oat growing countries was: Argentina (300,665 ha), Brazil (267,652 ha), Chile (104,620 ha), and Uruguay (50,000 ha). In the last decade, there had been a very considerable increase in area under oat cultivation in sub-tropics: (i) In the southern cone of South America, vast areas of oats are now being grown as fodder and as cover crop during winter, (ii) In sub-tropical and temperate Asia, especially in the north of the subcontinent, oats have become important winter fodders entirely in small holder- run agriculture largely through the introduction of better, multicut cultivars. -

The total area covered under oat cultivation in the country is about 500,000 ha. The crop occupies maximum area in Uttar Pradesh (34%), followed by Punjab (20%), Bihar (16%), Haryana (9%) and Madhya Pradesh (6%). Rest of the area is shared by Gujarat, Maharashtra, Orissa, Uttarakhand, etc.

The green fodder productivity ranges from 50 to 60 t/ha and dry matter productivity from 15-20 tonnes/ha. The seed production is around 2-3 tonnes/ha.

Climate and soil

Oat is mostly grown in cool moist climates which are considered as the best due to high water requirement of oat to produce a unit of dry matter compared with any other cereal crop except rice. Oat is highly sensitive to hot dry weather at the growth stage between head emergence and maturity. The crop can be grown at temperatures varying between 5 and 30°C. However, the optimum temperature required is 25°C. At low temperature, its germination is delayed, while grain production is hampered by hot, dry weather, especially from heading through the grain-filling period.

There are two main situations where oats have a great advantage: (i) In cold, short growing seasons, either at high latitudes or high altitudes, (ii) In warmer, sub-tropical and Mediterranean climates where they can be grown in winter and provide excellent fodder while allowing double cropping. Oat is grown mostly as spring-sown crop, but autumn sowing is practised in higher altitude regions, including the Himalaya-Hindu Kush range, and in regions where summers are hot and dry. In Canada, northern USA and higher altitudes in tropics, where winter is severe, short to medium season maturity oat varieties are grown

Oat is well adapted to a wide range of soil types and it is the most versatile crop among the cereals in adaptation to soil types. Under favourable temperature and moisture conditions, oat can be best cultivated in well-drained rich friable loam to sandy loam soils. In acid soils, it can perform better than other small grain cereals. Oat can tolerate acid soils up to a pH of 4.5, and is also fairly tolerant to salt conditions.

Cultivation practices

Land preparation: The land should be ploughed well or worked with a blade harrow 3-4 times. There should be a gap of about a month between the harvesting of previous crop and the sowing of oat to allow stubble to decay well. However, if the oat, crop is to be grown immediately after harvesting the previous crop, it would be desirable to remove stubbles to ensure good germination.

Sowing time: The sowing season of oat lasts from early October to early January.

1056

Under Indian conditions, October (first week) to December (second week) is considered as the best sowing period. For forage (multicut), the crop should be sown in October.

Method of sowing: Usually, the seed is broadcast in case of fodder crop. However, line sowing at 20 cm is preferred for higher fodder yield. For grain crop, the seeds are sown in rows spaced at 20-25 cm. Oat seeds are sown at a soil depth of 2 - 4 cm. They are less sensitive to deep planting than wheat, barley or rye. Thus, oat is often sown with less tillage than other crops, because seedlings emerge well irrespective of depth of seed placement.

Seed rate: One optimum seed rate is seldom followed because oat plants adjust their tillering and growth depending upon the plant density. Therefore, a moderate reduction in seeding rates seldom results in a yield reduction due to production of vigorous plants with higher number of tillers. Very high seeding rates result in increased competition, weaker culms and increased lodging. Seed rate varies from 70-80 kg (seed crop) to 90-100 kg (fodder crop) per hectare.

Irrigation: Irrigation requirement of oat depends on the soil type and climate. In general, oat crop requires three to four irrigations. For maximizing the yield, the crop should be irrigated at 60 mm cumulative evaporation, as measured with open pan evaporimeter. The tillering and heading (before and after) stages are critical for irrigation.

Fertilizer application: Adequate nutrients must be present in the soil throughout the growing season to obtain the maximum yield. Oat plants will be less vigorous with smaller leaves and panicles, and less developed root system, if the nutrients are scarce in the first half of life cycle. The nutrient deficiencies in the later growth stages adversely affect seed set and grain filling. Proper nutrient management is influenced by the previous crop, soil moisture and rainfall pattern, capability of soil to supply essential nutrients, cultivar used, time of fertilizer application, likelihood of lodging and the nutrient source. When grown as a grain crop, manure is generally applied to the previous crop in rotation to prevent lodging. For the fodder crop, a fairly heavy basal application of organic manure supplemented with top-dressing of nitrogenous fertilizers is practised to enhance early growth of the plants. The application of 80- 100 kg of N per ha and 40-60 kg of P,O,/ha has been found beneficial. For multicut crop, nitrogen is applied in split doses after each cutting.

Harvesting, threshing and yield: The crop matures in about 130-150 days depending on the variety used. For fodder production, two to four cuts are taken from December to April and the crop is allowed to set seed. For single cut, plants are harvested once at 50% flowering stage. For two cut system, the first cut is taken at 60 days and the second cut at 50% flowering stage. For multicut, the first cut is taken at 50 days after sowing and the subsequent cut at 30 days interval. In case of dual-purpose oats, the plants may be allowed to produce grains after single cut for forage at flower initiation stage.

In case of grain production, the crop is harvested at grain maturity. However, in fertile soils, one cut as forage at 50 days after sowing may be taken to avoid lodging of the plants at maturity. Harvesting should be done when the grains are mature, but the straw is still some what green; otherwise there is likelihood of loss in yield due to grain shedding. With normal cultivation practices, the crop produces 50-60 tonnes of. green fodder/ha and 2-3 tonnes of grain/ha.

1057

OAT

Diseases and pests

Oat, like all other major crops, suffers from a wide range of diseases and pests. Some of these are highly specific, even to particular oat varieties, while others have a broad host range, each bringing with it particular problem of control. All stages of plant growth and development are liable to be affected by particular pathogens or pests. Some pathogens and pests may cause damage only at a certain growth stage or on particular plant parts or organs, while others are generally more damaging at all growth stages and affect all plant parts.

Various diseases and pests are found in mild, humid environment where oat is grown. The economic success of oat production is ultimately linked with the availability of resistant varieties. Information on some of the important diseases and pests is summarized below.

Crown rust (Puccinia coronate avenae): It is the most important world-wide distributed disease of oat, and is important in temperate climatic regions of India. Disease symptoms appear as yellow pustules containing masses of urediospores, which are exposed after the rupture of epidermis. The lesions are circular or oblong and occur on both the surfaces of leaf. The characteristic symptom is the presence of small orange lesions on the leaf surface arranged in lines covering entire leaf.

Stem rust (Puccinia graminis avenae): It is an important disease of cereals and grasses throughout the world. Disease symptoms most commonly appear on stems and leaf sheaths, but leaf blades and spikes may also become infected. Urediospores develop in pustules that rupture epidermis and expose masses of reddish- brown spores. The pustules are larger than those of crown rust, oval or elongated with loose or torn epidermal tissue along their margins. Epidemics are more likely when weather is warm (15-30°C) and moist. The uredial and telial pustules appear on stems and leaves, and adversely affect plant growth. The disease reduces forage yield and quality as well as grain yield.

Leaf blotch (Helminthosporium avenae): The symptoms of the disease appear in the form of small brown, necrotic spots which coalesce and form larger spots of irregular shape and size. Heavy infection results in leaf damage and reduced grain yield. This disease is particularly severe in northern region of the country.

Sclerotial wilt (Sclerotium rolfsii): Though this disease is of minor importance in all the oat-growing areas in the country, it has recently become an important seedling disease, causing considerable damage to the crop at a few specific locations in northern and eastern regions. It causes wilting of the seedlings.

Smut: Two types of smuts are common in oat, loose smut (Ustilago avenae) and covered smut (Ustilago kolleri). Disease symptoms are mostly visible on the panicles. Infected panicles emerge at the same time as healthy ones and usually have a narrower and erect habit. Loose smut destroys seeds, hulls and glumes and replaces them with a powdery mass of dark brown spots. In covered smut, the somewhat compact spores are enclosed in the remains of hulls and glumes, which turn light grey towards maturity.

Stem borer (Sesamia inferens): Insect-pests do not cause much damage to oats in India. Borer is sporadic but mild in attack in northern India. The caterpillar bores plant and makes dead-hearts in the young stage.

Cyst nematode (Heterodera avenae): This was the first cyst-forming nematode reported in India in 1958 from Rajasthan, causing considerable damage. Its infestation

1058

results in stunted, knotted root systems. Aerial parts show reduced growth and yellowed leaves. Panicle development is delayed or absent in severe infestation. Moist, cool weather at the time of larval emergence is favourable to the nematode. Root-knot nematode (Pratylenchus spp.) is other important species found to damage this crop.

Management of diseases and pests

The important diseases/pests, their causal organisms, symptoms and control measures are given in Table 32.5.1.

Important varieties

Several important fodder oat varieties were developed at different institutions including the Indian Grassland and Fodder Research Institute (IGFRI), Jhansi, and

1059

OAT

CCS HAU: Chaudhary Charan Singh Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar; CSK HPKV: CSK Himachal Pradesh Krishi Vishvavidyalaya, Kangra; GBPUA&T: Govind Ballabh Pant University of Agriculture and Technology, Pantnagar; PAU: Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana; SKUA&T: Sher-e-Kashmir University of Agriculture and Technology, Srinagar; MPKV: Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth, Rahuri; JNKVV: Jawaharlal Nehru Krishi Vishva Vidyalaya, Jabalpur; IGFRI: Indian Grassland and Fodder Research Institute, Jhansi

the State Agricultural Universities (SAUs). These varieties were released by the Central Sub-Committee on Crop Standards, Notification and Release of Varieties for Agricultural Crops, Government of India for cultivation in different agro-climatic zones of the country and are given in Table 32.5.2.

Salient features of promising varieties

HFO 114 (Haryana Javi 114): This variety was developed by pure line selection method from germplasm line 37/14 and was released for multicut system for all oat- growing areas in temperate and sub-tropical regions of India. It is tall, erect, with green leaves, drooping at the time of panicle emergence, with synchronous flowering and bold seeds. It gives 60 tonnes of green fodder yield/ha in two cuts, 13 tonnes of dry matter yield/ha in two cuts, and 2 tonnes of seed yield/ha.

Palampur 1: This variety was developed by selection from germplasm line Algerian and was released in 1980 for cultivation in low and mid hill regions of Himachal

1060 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

Pradesh. The variety is characterized by medium maturity, profuse tillering, lodging resistance, good regeneration ability, rich in crude protein and green fodder yield potential of 45 t/ha, and dry matter yield of 9 tonnes/ha

OS 6: This variety was developed by intervarietal hybridization (HFO 10 x HFO 55 P,-2), followed by pedigree method of selection and was released in 1981 for cultivation in all oat-growing areas in temperate and sub-tropical regions of India. The variety is erect, has good early vigour, fast growth, broad leaves, flag leaf remains erect at the time of panicle emergence, open panicle, seeds medium bold, suitable for both single and multicut. Its green fodder yield potential is 50 tonnes/ha (one cut), and dry matter yield potential is10 tonnes/ha (one cut).

OS 7: This variety was developed by intervarietal hybridization (HFO 10x HFO 55 P3), followed by pedigree method of selection and was released in 1981 for cultivation in all oat-growing areas in temperate and sub-tropical regions of India for single cut system. The variety is erect, tall, fast growing, good in early vigour; leaves long, broad and light green in colour; flag leaf remains erect at the time of panicle emergence, open panicle, and seeds less bold; It gives green fodder yield of 53 tonnes/ ha (one cut), and dry matter yield of 11 tonnes/ha (one cut).

UPO 94: This variety was developed by pure line selection from germplasm line OGP 73 M 94 and was released in 1980 for cultivation in North-West and Central India. The variety is compact and prostrate with spreading growth in early stages, quick regrowth after cutting/ grazing; foliage dark green; broad, medium sized, semi- drooping leaves; awns absent, 50% heading in 120-125 days; plant height 110-115 cm, panicle equilateral, maturity 155-160 days; resistant to rust, smut and leaf blight; suitable for grazing also; Its green fodder yield potential is 45 tonnes/ha, and dry matter yield potential is 8-9 tonnes/ha.

UPO 212: This variety was developed by intervarietal hybridization (VS 1492 x Kent), followed by pedigree breeding and selection and was released in 1990 for cultivation in north and central India under multicut system. The variety is of 120-125 cm height, erect at juvenile growth stage with light-green stem, average 8-10 tillers; leaves mid-sized, broad and drooping, light green in colour; unilateral panicles, thin and variable awns, medium bold plump grains; multicut variety suitable for dual purpose (fodder-cum-grain) cultivation; tolerant to seed shattering, resistant to rust, smut and leaf blight at field level, 50% heading in 110-115 days, maturity in 140-150 days; green fodder yield 60 tonnes/ ha, dry matter yield, 11-12 tonnes/ha, and seed yield 1.5-2.0 tonnes/ ha.

OL 125: This variety was developed by intervarietal hybridization (Appler x [PC 63), followed by pedigree breeding and selection and was released in 1995 for cultivation in north-west and central zones of the country. The variety is suitable for both single cut and multicut systems and is high tillering and small seeded, plant height is 126 cm, higher number of tillers/plant (7), very good leaf : stem ratio (1.20), takes approximetely 130 days to flowering, green fodder yield 58 tonnes/ha, and dry matter yield 10-11 tonnes/ha.

HJ 8: This variety was developed by intervarietal hybridization (OS 7 x S 3021 P,.), followed by pedigree breeding and selection and was released in 1997 for cultivation in Haryana state. The variety possesses fast growth, better regeneration ability and is suitable for two cuts; flag leaf remains erect at the time of panicle emergence, panicle straight and open, leaves broad and light green in colour; green

1061

OAT

fodder yield 69 tonnes/ha, dry matter yield 12 tonnes/ha.

SK 0-7 (SABZAAR): This variety was developed by selection from UPO 212 and released in 1997 for cultivation in temperate areas of Kashmir valley and high altitude regions of Jammu Division. The variety is profusely tillering, highly leafy, suitable for dual purpose, moderately resistant to aphids and armyworm, crude protein 7-9%; green fodder yield 35-40 tonnes/ha, dry matter yield 7-7.5 tonnes/ha, seed yield 0.9 tonnes/ha.

Bundel Jai 851(JHO 851): This variety was developed by selection from exotic Japanese germplasm line Hiugo Karyokuro and was released in 1998 for cultivation in the entire country. This is a multicut variety having fast regeneration ability and high protein content, can give up to 4 cuts, takes 110-115 days for flowering and 140- 145 days for maturity. It has prostrate growth habit but becomes erect after tillering, profuse tillering type with thin grassy type stems, narrow leaf, equilateral panicle, spikelet disarticulation by fracture, floral separation by basifracture, grayish yellow colour, non-hairy lemma, single weak awn, long narrow seed; green fodder yield 47 tonnes/ha, dry matter yield 8.0 tonnes/ha, and seed yield 1.2 tonnes/ha.

Bundel Jai 822 (JHO 822): This multicut variety was developed from intervarietal cross, IGO 4268 x Indio 6-5-1, followed by pedigree method of selection and was released in 1989 for cultivation in central zone of the country. The variety is characterized by erect growth habit, glabrous nodes, panicle equilateral, seeds medium, plump and bold; takes 95-100 days for flowering and 125-130 days for maturity; green fodder yield 50 tonnes/ha, dry matter yield 12 tonnes/ha, and seed yield 1.5 tonnes/ha.

Bundel Jai 992 (JHO 99-2): A new high yielding good quality fodder oat variety was developed using intervarietal hybridization (OS 6 x JHO 851-1), followed by pedigree method of selection and was released in 2004 for cultivation in north-east and north-west zones of the country for single cut system. The variety is characterized by medium plant height, erect, leafy, moderate tillering; panicle equilateral, medium sized (30-32 cm), spikelets non-shattering type, floret separation basifracture type, 90-100 florets per panicle; seed creamish white, plump and oblong, 1,000 seed weight 30-32 g; flowering in 100-105 days and crop maturity in 140-145 days; high seed yield; resistance to disease, insect-pests and nematodes. The variety is particularly marked for its high quality, viz., crude protein and fibre content. It is highly digestible showing more than 58% in-vitro dry matter digestibility and has high level of crude protein content (10.7%) on dry matter basis; green fodder yield 50 tonnes/ha, and dry matter yield 10 tonnes/ha.

Bundel Jai 2004 (JHO 2000-4): A high yielding variety developed by interspecific hybridization (A. sativa x A. maroccana), followed by induced polyploidy and pedigree method of selection. The variety was released for cultivation in north-east, north-west, south and hill zones. The variety possesses resistance/ tolerance against root rot, crown rust, leaf blight and powdery mildew. The variety has superior quality crude protein (CP) 11%, acid detergent fibre (ADF) 47.9%, neutral detergent fibre (NDF) 62.45% and in-vitro dry matter digestibility (IVDMD) 57.6%. The variety matures in 145-150 days and produces green fodder yield of 50 tonnes/ha, and dry matter yield of 10 tonnes/ha.

Bundel Jai 991 (JHO 99-1): This variety was developed by intervarietal

1062

1062 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

hybridization (OS 7 x IGO 320 -1139-19), followed by pedigree method of selection and was released in 2007 for cultivation in hill zone of India for single cut system in temperate and sub-temperate areas during rabi season. The variety is characterized by 120-125 cm plant height., late maturity, seed-to-seed maturity 150-155 days, florets per panicle 95-100; inflorescence length 32-35 cm; seeds bold, 1,000 seed weight 34- 35 g, resistant to lodging, non-shattering; moderate to high resistance against leaf blight, moderate resistance to nematodes, high resistance against grasshoppers, aphids. The variety is very good in fodder quality possessing 9.5-10% CP, 47% ADF, 63% NDF, 57.4% IVDMD. It produces green fodder yield of 30 tonnes/ha, dry matter yield of 7 tonnes/ha, and seed yield of 1.2-1.3 tonnes/ ha.

Harita (RO 19): The variety was developed by selection from the base population of Kent. It was released in 2007 for cultivation in Maharasthtra. The variety possesses high leaf stem ratio and is resistant to leaf blight disease; it has potential of green fodder yield of 65 tonnes/ha, and dry matter yield of 9.45 tonnes/ha.

OL 9: The variety was developed by hybridization (NP Hybrid x Kent), followed by pedigree selection. It was released in 1986 for cultivation in Punjab. It has medium bold seed, tall plant with medium narrow leaves. Its green fodder yield potential is 60 tonnes/ha and dry matter yield potential is 13 tonnes/ha Average yield 53.3 tonnes/ha.

JO 1: The variety was developed by intervarietal hybridization (Kent x UPO 50), followed by pedigree method of selection. It was released in 2001 for cultivation in central zone. It is an erect variety with broad leaf, profuse tillering, lemma grayish yellow colour, non- hairy, single weak awn, panicle equilateral, crude protein 8-10%, days to flowering 90-95 days; seed-to-seed maturity 140-145 days; green fodder yield potential yield 58.5 tonnes/ha (two cuts); seed yield 1.8-2.1 tonnes/ha.

Kent: The variety is an introduction from USA and was released in 1975; it is a medium late variety with erect long drooping leaves; it is resistant to rust, blight and lodging and is capable of producing green fodder yield of 50 tonnes/ha, and dry matter yield of 10 tonnes/ha.

Abiotic stress tolerance

Genus Avena is known for tolerance to high alkalinity. In general, oats are tolerant to high pH conditions. Even in acid soils, some of the varieties have been reported to perform well. Oats can also withstand harsh winter and therefore are successfully grown in hills.

. a . Suitable varieties for problem soils

Intercropping and crop rotations

1063

Important crop sequences for different zones

Some high yielding forage crop sequences involving oat as a component recommended for different zones are given in Table 34.5.4.

Importance and uses

Oat, both as forage and grain, is a good source of protein, fibre and minerals. It has more protein per kilogram than corn but fewer calories. Oat has manifold uses such as animal feed, fodder, human food and industrial uses. It is used as green crop, hay and silage for animals. Grazing is a less common practice and heavy grazing is not advisable due to the nature of its root system.

Oat as grain: Most of the oat grain is consumed as animal feed, alone or in mixture. It is principally fed to dairy cattle, horses, mules and turkeys, with lesser quantities fed to hogs, beef cattle and sheep.

The traditional preparation of oats for human consumption is highly laborious as grain has to be milled to remove glumes, often after kiln-drying, then winnowed to obtain the ‘groats’ which are edible husk-less grains, before any further milling or preparation.

1064

Oat is gaining wide popularity in the form of food. Its consumption in many countries including India is increasing on a fast scale as oat meal, oat granola, baby food and breakfast cereal. The studies now confirm that oat helps in lowering blood cholesterol and is also helpful in the control of diabetes. Oat is the only cereal containing a globulin or legume-like protein, avenalin, as the major storage protein. Oat protein is nearly equivalent to soy protein. Water soluble fibre of oat bran and whole oat is good for health. Oat meal or oat flour is not suitable for bread-making but are consumed traditionally as porridge or hard, flat cakes, oat meal cookies or as breakfast cereal.

Oat as fodder: Whole crop green oats may be grazed, cut and carried, ensiled or made into hay. In India, the crop is well adopted by the farmers for its multicut nature and high yield of nutritious palatable fodder. It has excellent growth habit, quick recovery after cutting and good quality herbage. It is a palatable, succulent and nutritious crop and has a high fat, good quality protein and mineral content. Oat hulls, a food processing by-product may be used as an animal feed.

Oats can be made into good hay in areas with dry, warm conditions at harvest time. Oats are easy to be ensiled although their hollow stems require short chopping and good compaction. Oat straw is a good, palatable roughage and is also an excellent bedding. Ensiling of oats in small bags is very popular in hills especially in Nepal.

Recently, another clan of oat - naked oat (hull-less), a variant of A. sativa has attracted the attention of researchers. It can be threshed easily. By virtue of low fibre,

1065

OAT

high level of oils and essential amino acids, naked oats have considerable scope for feeding pigs, poultry and milch cattle. At present, the grain is used in specialized markets including feed for race horses, pet food, milled oat products and use in food industry.

Other uses: Oat hulls can be used as fuel for power plants or in manufacturing chemicals. Oat hulls are a basic raw material in the production of furfural, a chemical intermediate in the production of a number of important industrial products such as nylon, lubrication oils, butadiene, phenolic resin glues and rubber tread materials. Processed oat flour also provides a base for some cosmetic products and is used as antioxidants in food products. Oat extract can also be used to soothe skin conditions e.g. skin lotions.

Sources of seed availability

Oat seeds can be procured from the National Seed Corporation, Pusa Campus, New Delhi, and also from the State Seed Corporations in the major oat-growing states. Oat seed production is in the seed production chain of the country and every year hundred quintals of breeder seed of released varieties are produced and distributed for further multiplication in the chain.

Seeds can also be procured from the Indian Grassland and Fodder Research Institute (IGFRI), Jhansi, and various State Agricultural Universities (SAUs) such as CCS Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, GB. Pant University of Agriculture and Technology, Pantnagar, Mahatama Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth, Rahuri, Jawaharlal Nehru Krishi Vishvavidyalaya, Jabalpur , Himachal Pradesh Krishi Vishvavidyalaya, Palampur and Sher-e-Kashmir University of Agriculture and Technology, Srinagar where the particular oat varieties were developed and released for cultivation.

32.6 Millets

Millets, small-seeded annuals belonging to family Poaceae, were the first crops to be cultivated prior to plough age. The millets are categorized as major and minor based on size of seeds and the extent of cultivation. Sorghum and pearl millet are considered as the major millets, and other millets, viz. finger millet, foxtail millet, proso millet, barnyard millet, kodo millet, little millet, and others such as fonio and teff as the small millets (synonyms: minor millets, under-utilized crops, miscellaneous cereals). However, realizing the excellent nutritional composition of these grains they are now called as nutritious grains or nutri cereals,

Among the rainfed crops, millets as a group figure prominently. India is one of the major producers of millets in the world. The predominant millets grown in India are sorghum (jowar), pearl millet (bajra), finger millet (agi), kodo millet (kodo), proso millet (cheena), little millet (Autki), foxtail millet (kangni), and barnyard millet (sawa); of which barnyard millet, little millet and kodo millet are endemically domesticated in Indian sub- continent. Millets are warm weather grasses belonging to C, group of plants and considered as physiologically efficient. Their cultivation in India extends from sea-level up to 2,000 m above mean sea-level (MSL) and often grown in diverse soils, climates and harsh environments. Millets have been important food and feed crops producing more reliable harvests than many other crops. The annual planting area under all millets in India put together is 21-22 million ha producing around 20 million tonnes. During the last 5 decades, there has been a gradual reduction in the cultivated area of millets in the country. Yet, production has increased because of near doubling of productivity from less than 500 kg/ha to around 1,000 kg/ha in the last 5 decades. Among millets, the productivity is highest in finger millet (around 1,500 kg/ha) followed by sorghum (1,000 kg/ha), pearl millet (750 kg/ha), and other millets (500 kg/ha).

SORGHUM

Sorghum (Sorghum bicolor), popularly called as jowar, is one of the most important food and fodder crops in India and occupies third place in area and production. The area under sorghum has gradually declined from 18 million ha in 1960s to 9 million ha in 2006. The sorghum is grown in 2 major seasons, viz. kharif (June-July to September—October) and rabi (September—October to F ebruary—March). The decline in area is mostly in kharif and at present, kharif area is around 4 million ha and rabi area is around 5 million ha. As far as the productivity is concerned, the kharif crop yields higher (1,100—1,200 kg/ha) when compared with rabi crop (600-700 kg/ha).

Sorghum is grown mainly in Karnataka, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu in peninsular India/Deccan plateau; and Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh in central India. Sorghum is also grown over smaller area in many other sates primarily for fodder.

Soil and climate

Grain sorghum is grown over a variety of soils from light to medium deep black

1067

MILLETS

soils. However, the cultivation of rabi sorghum is more or less confined to black soils and dependent on stored moisture for its growth.

Sorghum is considered as drought hardy crop and hence rated as an important component of dryland agriculture. The cultivation of sorghum is confined to areas where annual rainfall is ranging from 400 to 1,000 mm per annum. As bulk of rainfall is received during kharif from June to October in most parts of the country, the yields of kharif sorghum are more assured and significantly higher than rabi crop. As far as distribution of kharif and rabi sorghum is concerned, it is seen that in Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh, sorghum is confined exclusively to kharif and it is predominantly kharif and to a small extent in rabi in Gujarat. It is equally distributed in kharif and rabi in Andhra Pradesh and predominantly rabi crop (70-75%) in Maharashtra and Karnataka. In Tamil Nadu sorghum is grown all through the year in kharif, rabi and summer seasons. Only a small proportion of sorghum area (less than 10%) is under irrigation.

Kharif sorghum

Despite decrease in the kharif sorghum area, there has been significant increase in production and productivity owing to adoption of high-yielding cultivars and improved agro-production technology including disease and pest management strategies.

Varieties

A large number of high-yielding varieties and hybrids of different durations have been released during the last 4 decades. The high-yielding cultivars can be grouped as early- sown cultivar (95—105 days) andmedium-sown cultivar (105-110 days) and there is scope to choose an appropriate hybrid or variety based on maturity as well as plant height which is helpful in meeting the needs of different situations and agro-climates.

The improved variety or hybrids do exhibit large variability not only for duration but also for grain quality (Table 32.6.1). Some of the notable hybrids/varieties released in recent past are CSH 16, CSH 17, CSH 18, CSH 23, CSH 25 and CSV 15, CSV 17, CSV 20 and CSV 23. The hybrids CSH 13, CSH 14 and CSH 15 and variety CSV 15 released nearly 2 decades ago are still popular and in cultivation (Table 32.6.1).

Adoption of improved cultivars: The release of productive sorghum hybrids CSH 1 and CSH 2 in mid-sixties; CSH 5 and CSH 6 in mid-seventies; CSH 9, CSH 10, CSH 11 in eighties; CSH 13, CSH 15 and CSH 17 in nineties; and the very recent hybrids CSH 23 and CSH 25 have broadened the base of hybrid cultivation. The area under hybrids has gradually increased from mere 0.2 million ha in 1966-67 to more than 8.0 million ha in late 2005-06. The coverage under high-yielding varieties/ hybrids are rapid in Maharashtra, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu compared to other states. However, the coverage under high-yielding varieties in absolute area has remained more or less same despite decrease in area under sorghum cultivation. The large-scale adoption of high-yielding varieties and other production technologies is grossly reflected in the improvement in per ha productivity from 540 kg/ha to around 1,000 kg/ha during 2005-06.

The hybrids and varieties bred out of continuous and sustained crop improvement efforts targeted specific as well as wide adoptation besides resistance to many of important biotic and abiotic stresses.

1068

1069

MILLETS

Cultural practices

Sowing time: Being a rain-dependent kharif crop, sowing is best done with the onset of monsoon. Obviously, the sowing time varies from region to region depending on the commencement of rain. In normal season, sowing is completed in July in most of the area and delay in sowing thereafter results in reduction in crop growth and yield. Experimental evidence is available to demonstrate feasibility of dry seeding, a weck before the likely receipt of rains.

Seed rate and sowing: The plant population of 0.18 to 0.2 million plants/ha is optimum. The recommended spacing to achieve this plant population is 45 cm between rows and 10-12 cm between plants within rows. A seed rate of 8-10 kg/ha is recommended to obtain the required plant population.

Manures and fertilizers: Sorghum responds very well to the application of manure and fertilizers. For sustaining productivity on long-term basis application of farmyard manure @ 10 tonnes/ha, 15 days prior to sowing is important. In addition to farmyard manure, application of 60 kg N and 40 kg P,O,/ha is recommended. To enhance the utilization of applied nitrogen, split application (50 % as basal dose and 50% as top- dress) is suggested. However, the P,O, is to be given as basal dose only.

Besides major nutrients, 2 micro-nutrients, viz. zinc and iron, are also effective in improving productivity. The foliar application of ZnSO, and FeSO, @ 2% and 0.15%, respectively, twice has shown beneficial results.

Interculture: Maintaining crop weed-free up to 30 days is important for realizing higher yield. One or two intercultures using blade harrow along with 1 hand-weeding will help in effective weed management and moisture conservation. Chemical weed control is also possible by spraying Atrazine @ 1 kg ai/ha immediately after sowing as pre-emergence weedicide.

In Striga-infected areas, adoption of Striga-resistant cultivars and crop rotation with trap crops, viz. castor, sunflower and groundnut, help in minimizing losses due to Striga menace.

Harvesting: Harvesting at physiological maturity is very important to avoid grain mould damage.

Rabi sorghum

The rabi sorghum area despite being more or less stable during the last 2 decades has not witnessed the expected productivity advances. The increase in rabi yields is from 482 kg/ha in mid-eighties to 637 kg/ha in mid-nineties. The rabi environment is harsh due to lower moisture availability and greater prevelance of diseases and pests that limit the productivity. Nevertheless, it is possible to overcome the limitations through the efficient management of crop during rabi.

Cultural practices

Land preparation: One deep ploughing with mould board plough followed by 2— 3 harrowings are needed to keep the field free of weeds. In exclusively rabi areas forming, many compartmental bunds of 10 m = 10 m in the month of August is helpful in moisture conservation and increasing yields.

Sowing time: Planting around middle of September is ideal but can be extended up to Ist week of October. It is however, important to suitably adjust sowing time to

1070

avoid shootfly menace. This is especially important in areas where kharif and rabi sorghum overlap. Soil compaction immediately after sowing helps in better germination and seedling establishment.

Varieties: As a result of intensive research efforts in the last 25 years in the All-India co-ordinated Sorghum Improvement Project, several high-yielding varieties/hybrids have been released (Table 32.6.1). However, the superiority of new hybrids/varieties has not been very striking when planting is somewhat delayed. As a result even today the old variety M 35-1 is still largely grown. Of late, efforts have been made to combine the local adaptation of traditional varieties with high yield potential that might help in creating desired impact in the rabi sorghum area in the coming years.

Seed rate and sowing: For rabi sorghum, the optimum plant population is 135,000 plants/ha. This could be achieved by adopting a row width of 45 or 65 cm and plant distance of 12 or 16 cm. The required seed rate for achieving this is 8-10 kg/ha. For irrigated rabi sorghum, a higher plant population of 150,000—180,000 plants/ha is appropriate.

Manures and fertilizers: A recommended dose of 40 kg N and 20 kg P,O,/ha, and application of 10 tonnes of farmyard manure/ha are helpful in effective crop management. Under irrigated condition, higher dose of N and P @ 80 kg/ha and 40 kg/ha, respectively, is recommended. The split application of N (50% at sowing and 50% as top-dressing after 30 days) is recommended for irrigated crop.

Intercultivation and weed control: Intercultivation using blade harrow once or twice is helpful in effectively conserving the precious soil moisture by providing top soil mulch and in checking weed growth. The chemical weed control using Atrazine @ | kg/ha as pre-emergence application is effective.

Irrigation: For the irrigated rabi crop grown in medium to deep black soils, 3 irrigations at germination, panicle-initiation stage and at grain filling are required. If water availability is limited, irrigation can be minimized to 1 or 2 and given at appropriate time looking at the available soil moisture.

Disease and pest management: Sorghum crop is affected by many pests and diseases. This is more so in fields which are grown under high management. The adoption of suitable cultural practices minimises the infection level and even helps in avoiding some of them. The major pests are shootfly, stem-borer, midge and earhead bug.

Shootfly can be avoided by suitable adjustment of planting time so that the vulnerable stage of crop escapes from shootfly damage. The completion of planting within 7-10 days of the onset of monsoon is effective in escaping shootfly damage of kharif crop. For rabi crop, planting by the end of September and Ist week of October helps in escaping shootfly damage. The late-planted crop can be protected from shootfly damage by seed treatment with Furadan 50 sp @ 100 g/kg seed. Application of Furadan 3 G or Phorate 10 G @ 20 kg/ha at the sowing also provides effective control of shootfly.

Stem-borer damage which is not serious in most situations can be checked by the application of insecticides, viz. Carbaryl 3c, Malathion 10p or Furadan 3c @ 10-12 kg/ha in the whorl at 30-35 days after germination.

Sorghum midge, a serious pest on kharif crop in parts of Maharashtra, Karmataka and Tamil Nadu, can be effectively managed through the integration of several cultural practices that affect the buildup of insect population. Some of these practices are early

1071

MILLETS

planting in kharif to escape peak midge activity, planting of cultivar showing uniform flowering and clean cultivation. Chemical control measures are needed when midge incidence is severe. These include dusting of Carbaryl 50 we, Carbaryl 3p once or twice at ear emergence and again 4—5 days later.

Earhead bug is another pest on kharif sorghum and its control involves early planting to minimize damage. Chemical control suggested for sorghum midge is also effective against earhead bug. Besides major pests, shoot bug, aphids, mites, panicle worm, and Pyrilla may appear as sporadic pests. However, the control measures taken for the major pests provide protection for these minor pests.

As regards diseases the major ones are grain mold (on kharif sorghum), rust, downy mildew, ergot, smut and charcoal rot. Grain mold disease is associated with late rains coinciding with grain maturation period. Being a very complex disease involving several fungal pathogens, its severity is more in years of prolonged rainfall during post-flowering phase. This results in discoloration of grains affecting severely the grain quality due to the presence of toxins harmful to humans and animals.The disease management involves combination of cultural and chemical control measures, careful choosing of varieties (for avoiding coincidence with late rains), harvesting at physiological maturity and chemical control using Aureofungin (200 ppm) and 0.2% Captan during flowering.

Rust disease is seen on both kharifand rabi sorghum and can be managed by growing resistant varieties. Spraying Dithane M-45 (2%) 2-3 times during early growth of plants gives good control.

Sorghum downy mildew is commonly prevalent in the transitional belt of Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. Growing of resistant cultivars and clean cultivation can effectively control the disease. Seed dressing with Metalaxyl compounds, viz. Ridomil 25 or Apron 35 sp @ 1 g a.i./kg seed, gives satisfactory control.

The charcoal rot is mostly prevalent on rabi crop due to moisture stress and high temperature during grain filling. Growing varieties resistant to stress conditions and practising moisture-conservation measures help in adequate control of the disease.

Forage sorghum

Sorghum as green foliage is very popular in western Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, Delhi, Gujarat, Rajasthan and in other states and nearly 2.5 million ha are planted during kharif. In summer under irrigation, multicut sorghum is popular. Forage sorghum is characterized by quick growth, high biomass accumulation and dry-matter content and wide adaptability besides drought with standing ability. It is also suitable for silage and hay making.

Varieties

There are improved varieties and hybrids capable of yielding on an average 50 tonnes/ha in single-cut varieties and up to 70 tonnes/ha in multicut varieties (Table 32.6.2). The dual-purpose varieties and hybrids CSV 15 and CSH 13 are suitable for both forage and grain production.

Cultural practices

The cultivation practices for forage sorghum production are given here.

1072

Field preparation and sowing: Normally 2-3 harrowings are required before taking up planting as rainfed crop and sown with the onset of monsoon. Seed rate of 10 kg/ha for multicut sorghum and 25 kg/ha for single-cut sorghum is required, Optimum spacing is 45 cm between rows for multicut sorghum and30 cm between rows for single-cut sorghum. As regards fertilizer application 100 kg N and 60 kg P,O,/ha for multicut sorghum and 80 kg N and 40 kg P,O,/ha for single- i t cu sorghum is recommended, In forage sorghum mixed cropping is also practised with fodder legumes, viz. cowpea and clusterbean, in2: 1 ratiotoimprove fodder yield and quality.

during harvesting for avoiding HCN poisoning. Single-cut varieties are harvested from 50% flowering to full bloom and in multicut varieties the first harvest is at 55 days after sowing and subsequent cuts at 40 days interval.

Sweet sorghum

A special type of sorghum known as sweet sorghum which is capable of accumulating sugar in stem just as sugarcane can be grown and processed to produce jaggery, syrup and more important the fuel alcohol. Sweet sorghum varieties can yield up to 30-50 tonnes of green cane/ha in addition to 1—2 tonnes of grains/ha. The sugar content in juice varies from 16 to 23% brix.

Most sweet sorghum varieties require 115-120 days of maturity during kharif. Stalk can be harvested either along with the grain or 4-5 weeks after the grain harvest. At the National Research Centre for Sorghum, Hyderabad, a number of varieties/ hybrids capable of producing up to 50 tonnes/ha of biomass with high juice brix have been identified. The first sweet sorghum variety released was SSV 84 in 1992. The other sweet sorghum varieties released are CSV 1955, SSV 74, HES 4, SSV 84 and CSV 22. Realizing the importance of sweet sorghum in diversifying uses of sorghum the first high-yielding hybrid CSH 22SS having a cane yield potential of 42-45 tonnes/ ha was released in 2005.

Climate and soil

Sweet sorghum is ideally sown during June, coinciding with the south-west monsoon. Rainfall of 500-600 mm well distributed across growing period is the best. The crop does not prefer high rainfall as high soil moisture or continuous heavy rain after flowering may hamper sugar synthesis. If irrigation is available, sowing can be advanced from June in such a way that the crop does not face heavy

1073

MILLETS

rains after flowering and more so during the second half of grain maturity. Sowing during rabi may result in low biomass and sugar yield. All soils that have medium depth (0.45 m and above) are suited. Depending on the soil (red, black, laterite and loamy) and its depth water requirement may vary, which in turn decide the suitability of the crop.

Cultural practices

Seed rate and fertilization: A good crop may have about 100,000—120,000 plants/ ha. This can be achieved with 8 kg seed/ha. Recommended dose of fertilizer for sweet sorghum in soils with normal fertility levels is 80 kg N, 60 kg P,O, and 40 kg K,O. Half of N and whole of P and K are applied as basal. Remaining N is top-dressed during 25-35 days after germination, following weeding and inter- cultivation.

Sowing: Sowing may be done on ridges/furrows at a spacing of 60 cm between rows and 15 cm within rows. The seeds 3-4 are dibbled in each hill and the seedlings are eventually thinned to 1 per hill.

Pest and disease control: Major pests are sorghum shootfly and stem-borer. Shoot- fly attack is seen after germination up to 30 days. Stem-borer incidence may be at a later stage and continues up to maturity. Shootfly attack is noted by deadhearts in seedlings and heavy tillering is seen in affected plants later.

Sorghum-based cropping systems

Intercropping: In low rainfall and light soil condtions, hybrid sorghum and medium- duration pigeonpea can be intercropped in 2 : 1 row ratio. The sorghum hybrid CSH 14 and medium-duration pigeonpea varieties C 11 or BDN 2 are suitable for such intercropping. In high rainfall and relatively heavy soils a row ratio of 3 : 3 is practised. Other profitable intercropping system is the sorghum and fodder cowpea in 2:2 row ratio.

Sequence cropping: In areas receiving higher rainfall of more than 700 mm along with medium deep black soils, a rabi crop is sequenced after the kharif sorghum is harvested. Safflower and gram are the 2 important sequence crops for such situations. For successful sequence cropping, timely harvesting of kharif sorghum is important to facilitate early planting of the sequence crop.

PEARL MILLET

Pearl millet (Pennisetum glaucum) is the fourth most important grain crop next to rice, wheat and sorghum. The crop is cultivated for grain as well as fodder in the semi- arid tropical regions of Africa and Asia including India. In India, annual planting area is around 10 million ha producing nearly 7.5 million tonnes of grains. It is grown mainly in Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh. It is the most drought- and heat-tolerant crop with highest water-use efficiency.

Pearl millet traditionally is an indispensable component of dry-farming system. With the advent of pearl millet hybrids in mid-sixties, the pearl millet cultivation received a fillip. As a result, the productivity almost doubled from around 350 kg in mid-sixties to around 790 kg in late nineties. The crop is mostly confined to low

1074

1074 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

fertile water deficit soils. Because of its remarkable ability to withstand and grow in harsh environment, reasonable and assured harvests are obtained. The crop responds very well to added nitrogen, cultural management, water harvesting and capable of giving higher yields than that of what it is now.

Pearl millet area in Rajasthan accounts for nearly 50% of area and one-third of total production in the country. The productivity is higher especially in the Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat and Haryana when compared with other states.

Soil and climate

The crop grown mostly during kharif from June to October. However, in Tamil Nadu and Gujarat it is also grown in summer season under irrigation.

Crop is grown on a wider range of soils from very light soils on sand dunes in Rajasthan to red loames in Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and parts of Maharashtra and on black soils in Andhra Pradesh, parts of Karnataka and Maharashtra. The varieties grown in India are relatively less photosensitive and suitable for cultivation throughout the year.

Varieties

The improved varieties/hybrids are quite diverse especially for maturity duration and as a result, it is possible to choose appropriate variety depending on the need. Another area where crop improvement research has made significant contributions is in developing hybrids/cultivars resistant to downy mildew. Since 1985, as many as 38 new hybrids were developed and released by public and private sector.

Besides hybrids, many open pollinated varieties and composites were also released for commercial cultivation. In view of a continued prevalence of downy mildew disease in the country, any new hybrid/variety released will have to necessarily possess high level of field resistance to this disease.

At present, hybrids are grown widely across the states. Some of them are Pusa 23, HHB 67 and ICMH 356. In addition, there are also regionally important hybrids, viz. GHB 558 and GHB 577 in Gujarat; Shraddha and Saburi in Maharashtra; HHB 50, HHB 60, HHB 68 and HHB 94 in Haryana; COH 8 in Tamil Nadu; and RHB 58, RHB 121and RHB 90 in Rajasthan. The early-maturing hybrids HHB 67, ICMH 356, RHB 121 and GHB 538 have showed promise in many states (Table 32.6.3).

Among the varieties, Raj 171, ICMV 221, Pusa Composite 334, Pusa 383 and Samrudhi are popular.

Cultural practices

Sowing time: Sowing is done normally in June-July with the onset of monsoon in kharif. The rabi crop is planted in October while summer crop is planted in the January- February.

Seed rate and sowing: Plant population 0.175 to 0.2 million/ha is optimum for obtaining higher yields. The recommended spacing is 45 cm between rows and 10-12 cm between plants within the row. The seed rate of 5 kg/ha is required to obtain the required crop stand and the seeds are to be drilled at 2 cm depth. In Rajasthan a lower plant population of 0.15-0.16 million is recommended. Pearl millet is amenable to

1075

MILLETS

transplanting and hence gap filling is possible using excess seedlings available elsewhere in the field.

Manures and fertilizers: Pearl millet responds very well to management especially to applied nutrients. In addition to the application of recommended dose of fertilizers, it is important to apply 8-10 tonnes of FYM, as it helps in moisture conservation. As the crop is grown under diverse conditions, from low to high level of management in different states, the manurial requirement also varies accordingly. For example in Rajasthan, where crop is grown under severe drought conditions, application of 20- 40 kg N/ha in 2 splits would be sufficient. On the other hand in Gujarat and Haryana and also in Maharashtra, 60-80 kg N/ha would be optimum. In addition, phosphorus and potassium also need to be provided to realize optimum yields. The fertilizer recommendation for different states is given in Table 32.6.4.

1076

Intercultivation and weed management: Maintaining field weed free for the first 30 days is very important to ensure good crop growth. Two intercultivations and one hand-weeding are necessary to minimize weed competition. Chemical weed control is possible with Atrazine @ 0.5 kg ai/ha given as pre-emergence spray. As a drought-management strategy in areas/ years of prolonged drought of 20-25 days before flowering, uproot every 3rd row and use uprooted plant as mulch.

Disease and pest management: Pearl millet is relatively less prone to pestsand diseases. However downy mildew among diseases, shootfly and root grub among pests are prevalent in many states. With the availability of many resistant varieties/hybrids for downy mildew, the

disease management has become somewhat easy. The released hybrids/varieties in recent years have high level of field tolerance to disease. Some of these are HHB 67 improved, RHB 121, GHB 558, GHB 538, Pusa 23, ICMH 356, PB 106, 7688, Raj 171, JBV 2, Pusa 383, CZP 9802, ICTP 8203 and ICMV 155. So choosing appropriate disease-resistant variety is an important step in effectively managing the disease. In addition to choice of variety, seed treatment with Apron 35 sp @ 2 g a.i/kg seeds followed by Metalaxyl spray @ 125 mg a.iJ/litre of water 20-25 days later will effectively check the disease, Rotation of different hybrids/improved varieties of pear! millet in alternate years is also effective in arresting spread of downy mildew.

Ergot is another important disease affecting pearl millet. The primary inoculum of the disease is in soil. The control measures include fall ploughing to expose and kill the inoculum present in soil and growing resistant varieties, viz. ICTP 8203 and ICMV 155.

» Plant-protection measures are essential for white grub and shoot-fly. White grub infestation can be managed by mixing of Phorate 10 c or Quinalphos 5 c @ 12 kg/ha with seed and applying in furrows at sowing.

Pearl millet-based cropping systems: Being a dryland crop several options of intercropping of pearl millet and pulses are prevalent in different states. In Rajasthan, intercropping of pearl millet with clusterbean or moth bean or cowpea or greengram in 2: 1 proportion is followed. This not only covers risks, due to failure of monsoon but also provides the grain legumes which help in better nutritional security and a source of additional income. In Maharashtra, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, an intercropping of pearl millet with one or the other pulses, viz. red gram/greengram/cowpea/horse gram/clusterbean/sunflower is practised.

Harvest and storage: Pearl millet is harvested when grain moisture is around 20%. Pearl millet grains are prone to spoilage during storage. Hence, it is important to bring

1077

MILLETS

down moisture to 12% or less for safe storage. Improved storage structure, viz. metal bins made out of GI sheets, are suitable for safe storage of grains. The pearl millet stover is a valuable feed for cattle.

FINGER MILLET

The cultivation of finger millet (ragi, mandua, nagli, kapai and madua) is widely distributed extending from Tamil Nadu in South to Uttarakhand in North; Gujarat in West to Orissa in East and even extending to north-eastern regions including Sikkim. The area under finger millet (E/eusine coracana) has declined from 2.6 million ha in early sixties to around 1.75 million ha in 2005-06. However, the annual production is maintained around 2.6 million tonnes with a productivity of around 1,500 kg/ha.

Finger millet is grown in different seasons in different parts of the country. Asa rainfed crop, it is sown in June—July in Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh; during June in Maharashtra, Orissa, Bihar, Uttarakhand, Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat; and in April-May in hills at higher altitudes of Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh. It is also grown in the winter season (rabi) by planting in September—October in Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh and as a summer irrigated crop by planting in January-February in Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Bihar.

Varieties

A number of high-yielding varieties were evolved and released for cultivation in different states (Table 32.6.5). The improved varieties have high genetic potential and are able to meet the specific requirements of different regions. This includes varieties for drier areas, saline and sodic soils for Tamil Nadu, for both early and late-planting situations in kharif, rabi and summer in Karnataka, varieties combining high seed and fodder yield with earliness for Uttarakhand, blast-resistant varieties for disease endemic regions and varieties suitable for coastal and high rainfall regions of Andhra Pradesh and Orissa.

Cultivation practices

Tillage: Ploughing is advantageous for moisture conservation. In April or May, | deep ploughing with mould board plough followed by one or two harrowings is necessary. Before sowing, secondary tillage with cultivator and multiple tooth hoe to prepare smooth seedbed is necessary.

Seed rate and planting: A plant population of 0.4-0.5 million/ha is optimum for getting higher yields. Higher or lower population than the optimum will reduce the yield. Line sowing is ideal and seed drills giving a spacing of 22.5-30 cm between rows should be used. Finger millet seeds are very small (400 seeds/g) and the recommended seed rate of 10 kg/ha will contain about 4 million seeds. Therefore, even when seed drill is used thinning within the row leaving a spacing of 7.5-10 cm between plants, must be followed. The recommended spacing for different states is given in Table 32.6.6.

Maintenance of optimum population is not a problem in transplanted crop. Seedlings are to be grown in raised bed for transplanting in the main field. About 5 kg seeds/ha is enough for the transplanted crop. In general, seedlings of 21-25 days old are ideal for transplanting in rows of 22.5-25 cm apart, with 2 seedlings per hill at every 10 cm

1078

1079

MILLETS

within row. Sowing by seed-cum-fertilizer drill is advantageous in efficient utilization of applied nutrients.

Maintenance of optimum plant population is an important pre-requisite for getting higher yields under rainfed conditions. Poor germination, often, is the result of inadequate moisture after sowing in low rainfall areas. Under these conditions, the adoption of technique like seed hardening will not only improve germination and subsequent plant stand but also impart early seedling vigour and tolerance: to drought.

The procedure of seed-hardening technique is as follows:

1. Soak seeds in water for 6 hr. Use 1 litre water for every kg seed for soaking.

2. Drain the water and keep the seeds in wet cloth bag tightly tied for 2 days.

3. At this stage, the seeds will show initial sign of germination.

4. Removeseeds from the wet cloth bag and dry them in shade onadry cloth for2 days.

5. Use the above hardened seeds for sowing.

Manuring and fertilization: Farmyard manure or compost @ 5 tonnes per ha should be applied 2-3 weeks prior to sowing. Finger millet responds well to fertilizer application, especially to N and P. The recommended doses of fertilizers vary from state to state and for rainfed and irrigated crop (Table 32.6.6). With judicious application of farmyard manure, inorganic fertilizer efficiency is enhanced. Entire P,O, and K,O are to be applied at sowing, whereas nitrogen is to be applied in 2 or 3 split doses depending upon moisture availability, In areas of good rainfall and moisture availability, 50% of recommended nitrogen is to be applied at sowing and the remaining 50% in 2 equal splits —at 25-30 and 40-45 days after sowing. In areas of uncertain rainfall, 50% N at sowing and the remaining 50% around 35 days after sowing is recommended.

Biofertilizers: Treating seeds with Azospirillum brasiliense (N-fixing bacterium) and Aspergillus awamori (P-solubilizing fungus) @ 25 g/kg seed is beneficial. If seeds are to be treated with seed-dressing chemicals, treat the seeds first with seed-dressing chemicals and then with biofertilizers at sowing.

Weed control: In line-sown crop 2-3 inter-cultivations are necessary. In assured

1080

rainfall and irrigated areas, spraying 2, 4-D sodium salt @ 0.75 kg a.i./ha as post- emergence spray around 20-25 days after sowing effectively control weeds. Isoproturon @ 0.5 kg a.i/ha as pre-emergence spray is also effective in control of weeds. In broadcast crop, 2 effective hand-weedings will minimize weeds as inter-cultivations are not possible.

Irrigation: For irrigated crop, depending on soil type, weather condition and duration of variety, 8-14 irrigations are necessary. Irrigate the crop once in 6-8 days in light soils and once in 12-15 days in heavy soils.

Cropping systems

Crop rotation: Rotation with legumes, viz. greengram/blackgram/rice bean/soybean in northern states, horsegram or groundnut in southern states will minimize inorganic fertilizer application and also sustain higher yields.

Intercropping: Several traditional intercropping systems are in vogue in many states. Mixed/intercropping of finger millet with as many as 7-9 crops, viz. horse- gram, niger, cowpea, field bean, little millet, pigeonpea, soybean, sorghum and mustard, is seen in several states. In Karnataka and Tamil Nadu a traditional intercropping, known as ‘Akkadi’, is very popular where many crops mentioned above are mixed and planted in a single row after 6-8 rows of finger millet. However, for higher income specific combinations are useful.

Finger millet + pigeonpea combinations in 8 : 2 or 6 : 2 proportion bring higher retums and suitable for many states. Finger millet + soybean in 4: 1 proportion or finger millet + field bean in 8 : 1 proportion are the other profitable crop combinations.

Diseases

Some of the important diseases of finger millet are given here.

Blast: Finger millet is affected by many diseases of which blast is the major one. The disease is severe in kharif and affects the crop at all growth stages. The loss is more when the disease appears on seedlings in the nursery and on ears after anthesis. The integrated blast-management practices were worked out which include:

(a) Growing resistant varieties, viz. VL 149, GPU 26, GPU 28, GPU 45 and GPU 48.

(b) Treating seeds with Thiram or Mancozeb or Carbendazim @ 2 g/kg seed 24 hr before sowing.

(c) Spraying the nursery if necessary with Carbendazim (0.05%) or Edifenphos (0.1%) or Mancozeb (0.2%) or Tricyclazole (0.06%).

(d) Repeating the above spray at 50% flowering and again 10 days later to control neck and finger blast.

(e) Sowing early in the season, replacing 25% N with either farmyard manure, compost and biofertilizers reduces the blast severity.

Helminthosporium blight or brown spot: This is normally not a severe disease and usually occurs at grain maturity. However, when occurs early especially on long- duration variety or late-sown crop, it can cause appreciable loss. The disease control measures include treatment of seeds, as mentioned for blast (other than Carbendazim); and spray of crop at tillering stage, if necessary, with Mancozeb or Zineb (0.2%).

Mottle streak and streak virus: The disease is prevalent in Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh. Mottle streak virus is transmitted by 2 species of leaf hoppers,

1081

MILLETS

viz. Cicadulina bipunctella bipunctella and Cicadulina chinai, and streak virus by Cicadulina chinai. The disease is generally severe on summer crop. The control measures include:

(a) Application of Carbofuran (10%) granules @ 30-35 g for a bed size of 7.5 m x 1.2 m, 2 days before sowing.

(b) Spray nursery with Dimethoate 30% ec (0.05%) or Methyl demeton (0.05%) 2 days before transplanting.

(c) Remove the infected plants from the main field.

Other diseases affecting the crop are foot-rot, downy mildew or green ear and smut. At higher altitudes, Cercospora leaf spot is also noticed. But, these diseases are of minor importance.

Pests: Finger millet is by and large devoid of serious pests and considered as eco- friendly crop. However, sporadic incidence of pests such as army worm, cutworm, stem-borer, leaf aphid, grasshoppers, grey weevil, shootfly and ear caterpillars are noticed.

Army worms and cut worms: They appear during the early stages of plant growth and continue up to harvest. The caterpillars cut seedlings at the base which appears as if grazed by domestic animal. They are active during night and hide themselves under stones and clods during the day. In later stages of plant growth, these insects act as defoliators. For control, take up dusting of Malathion 5% @ 24 kg/ha or Phosalone 5% @ 24 kg/ha or Quinalphos 1.5% @ 24 kg/ha when the symptoms are noticed.

Leaf aphid: It occurs throughout the crop-growing period. The nymphs and adults suck the sap from tender leaves and stem. They can cause serious damage in the seedling stage up to 30 days. Spraying Dimethoate (0.05%) or Quinalphos (0.05%) gives effective control.

Stem-borers: The larva bores into the stem, resulting in dead heart. Spraying the crop with Dimethoate (0.05%) or Monocrotophos (0.04%) helps in pest control.

Ear caterpillars: Ear caterpillars appear at dough stage on ears and persist till harvest. The caterpillars bite the maturing seeds and make a fine web out of their casting and half eaten grains. This further attracts saprophytic fungi. The control measures includes use of dust Malathion 5% @ 24 kg/ha or Quinalphos 1.5% @ 24 kg/ha or Phosalone 4% @ 24 kg/ha. The incidence of ear caterpillars is negligible on varieties with open or semi-compact ears. So, careful choice of varieties is advocated.

KODO MILLET

Kodo millet (Paspalum scrobiculatum), colloquial names, viz. kodo, varagu, haraka and arikalu, is indigenous to Indian subcontinent and known to be in cultivation for more than 3,000 years. Kodo millet is wide spread and grown in many states in south, west, central and north India. It is grown over 0.5 million ha with large areas in Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Mahararashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat and Tamil Nadu. Its cultivation is mostly confined to tribal areas grown under poor environment.

Cultural practices

Season: Sowing with the onset of monsoon is beneficial. Accordingly sowing time extends from middle of June to end of July in different states. The optimum sowing time in Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh which accounts for nearly 80% area under

1082

crop in the country is from last week of June to first week of July. In areas where June rains are assured, dry seeding 10 days before the onset of monsoon could be advantageous.

Varieties, spacing and seed rate: A number of varieties with high yield potential have been released for different states (Table 32.6.7). Spacing of 22.5 cm between tows and 10 cm between plants within row is optimum. The seed rate is 10 kg/ha for line sowing and 15 kg/ha for broadcasting.

Manuring and fertilization: Besides farmyard manure application, fertilizers @ 40 kg N and 20 kg P,O /ha for Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh and @ 20 kg each of NPK/ha for other states are recommended.

In high rainfall regions of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh nitrogen should be applied in 2 equal splits—half at sowing and remaining half around 3540 days after sowing. Treating seeds with Agrobacterium radiobacter and Aspergillus awamori @ 25 g/kg seed is beneficial.

Cropping system and weed control: Kodo millet + pigeonpea in 2:1 or kodo millet + greengram in 2: 1 is profitable in Madhya Pradesh. The other alternative intercropping system is kodo millet + soybean in 2: 1 proportion. Kodo millet-soybean crop rotation was found to be sustainable system in Madhya Pradesh. Hand-weeding twice around 20 and 35 days after sowing and 2-3 inter-cultivations are necessary.

Diseases and pests: Head smut is mainly a seed-borne disease. For control treat the seed with Emisan/Chlorothalonil or Mancozeb @ 2 g/kg seed before sowing and grow tolerant varieties, e.g. GPUK 3 and KMV 20.

Shootfly is the only serious pest and appears 10 days after sowing, resulting in deadhearts. It can cause significant yield losses in years of severe incidence. Control measures include sowing with the onset of monsoon that is beneficial; adopting higher seed rate (1% times the recommended seed rate); and need-based application of insecticides.

FOXTAIL MILLET

Foxtail millet (Setaria italica), colloquial names kangni, navane, tenai, korra and rala, is one of the oldest crops cultivated for straw and grain. Known for its drought tolerance, it was once an indispensable crop of vast rainfed areas in semi-arid regions in India. At present, foxtail millet is cultivated on a limited area in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and north eastern states.

Cultural practices

Season: Optimum time of sowing for rainfed crop is August-September in Tamil Nadu, July—August in Karnataka, first fortnight of July in Andhra Pradesh and second and third week of July in Maharashtra. In Tamil Nadu, kharif irrigated crop is planted from the beginning of June to end of July and summer irrigated crop in January. For plains of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, middle of June is the optimum sowing time.

Varieties, spacing and seed rate: A number of varieties with high yield potential were released for different states (Table 32.6.7). Optimum spacing is 25-30 cm between rows and 8-10 cm between plants within a row. The seed rate is 8-10 kg/ha for line

1083

MILLETS

sowing and 15 kg/ha for broadcasting.

Manuring, fertilization and weed control: Farmyard manure or compost @ 5 tonnes/ha should be applied 2-3 weeks prior to sowing. In addition, application of 20-40 kg N and 20 kg P,O, is recommended.

Two inter-cultivations and 1 hand- -weeding in line-sown crop and 2 hand-weedings in broadcast crop are necessary for effective weed control.

Cropping systems: Intercropping of foxtail millet + groundnut or foxtail millet + pigeonpea in 2:1 proportion is popular in Andhra Pradesh.

Relay and sequence cropping systems are also seen in some areas. If monsoon is early and favourable in Andhra Pradesh, foxtail millet is sown at 45 cm row spacing and rabi sorghum introduced as a relay crop when foxtail millet is nearing maturity.

In medium deep black soils of Andhra Pradesh, growing 2 crops, e.g. foxtail millet— mustard or foxtail millet-greengram, in sequence is profitable than taking alone crop of foxtail millet.

Diseases and pests: Blast and rust are of common occurrence; but do not cause damage. The disease can be controlled by spraying Mancozeb (0.2%). Smut is another disease which can be controlled by treating seed with Emisan @ 2 g/kg 24 hr before sowing. Green ear disease could be quite serious and control measures include treating seed with Ridomil mz @ 2 g/kg and clean cultivation.

Pests, e.g. army worm, cut worm and leaf scrapping beetle, appear occasionally in serious form. In certain areas shootfly occur, although it is not a regular pest. When pests are noticed, take up dusting of Malathion 5% @ 8-10 kg/ha.

PROSO MILLET

The antiquity of cultivation of proso millet (Panicum miliaceum) in India is not clear although the crop is known by different colloquial names, viz. cheena, panivaragu, variga and baragu. In recent years the area has dwindled drastically and grown in sporadic patches from the Himalayas in north to Tamil Nadu in south. The crop has many unique features, viz. early maturity (60-65 days) and high-drought tolerance.

Cultural practices

Season: It is chiefly grown in central and eastern Uttar Pradesh, western Bihar, north-eastern states and Andhra Pradesh. The rainy season crop is sown with the onset of monsoon, preferably in July. As late kharif or rabi crop, it is sown in September— October in Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh. In Bihar and Uttar Pradesh as irrigated catch crop, it is sown from mid-March to mid-May.

Varieties, spacing and seed rate: A number of varieties with high yield potential have been released for different states (Table 32.6.7). A spacing of 25 cm between rows and 10 cm between plants within the row and seed rate of 10 kg/ha for line sowing and 15 kg/ha for broadcasting is optimum.

Cultivation: Apply 5 tonnes of farmyard manure per hectare 2-3 weeks prior to sowing. In addition to farmyard manure, apply 20 kg N and 20 kg P,O./ha for realizing higher yields.

Two inter-cultivations and 1 hand-weeding in line-sown crop and 2 hand-weedings in broadcast crop are required for effective weed control. Intercropping of proso millet and greengram in 2 : 1 proportion is recommended for Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. Potato— proso millet rotation is profitable in western Bihar.

1084

1085

MILLETS

Diseases and pests: There are no serious diseases on this crop. Shootfly is the most serious pest of proso millet causing significant yield losses. Early sowing with the onset of monsoon is an effective and low-priced method of control.

BARNYARD MILLET

Barnyard millet (Echinochloa frumentacea) is another food crop domesticated in India and grown for both grain and fodder purposes. The colloquial names of barnyard millet are madira, sawa, kudraivali and oodalu. Barnyard millet is quite popular in hills especially the Himalayas and important component of hill and tribal agriculture. It is also grown on a lesser scale in Bihar, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh.

Season: In Tamil Nadu, rainfed crop is sown in September—October and irrigated crop in February-March. In Uttarakhand and north-eastern states, sowing in April— May is ideal. Dry seeding prior to the onset of monsoon is practised in hills.

Varieties, spacing and seed rate: A number of varieties with high yield potential have been released for different states (Table 32.6.7). Optimum spacing of 25 cm between rows and 10 cm between plants within row and seed rate of 8-10 kg/ha for line sowing and 12-15 kg/ha for broadcasting are optimum.

Cultivation: Apply 5 tonnes of farmyard manure/ha 2-3 weeks prior to sowing. The fertilizer recommendation is 20 kg N and 20 kg P,O, /ha.

Inoculating seeds with Agrobacterium radiobacter and Aspergillus awamori is recommended. Weed management is done with 2 inter-cultivations and 1 hand-weeding in line-sown crop and 2 Liud-weedings in broadcast crop. Intercropping of barnyard millet + ricebean in 4 : 1 proportion is recommended for Uttarakhand.

Diseases and pests: The crop is affected by 3 different smuts, viz. head smut (Ustilago crus-galli), grain smut (Ustilago panici frumentacei), and kernel smut (Ustilago paradoxa). For control, treat seeds before sowing with Emisan or Carbendazim or Thiram @ 2 g/kg seed.

Shootfly is the serious pest causing significant yield losses. Early sowing with the onset of monsoon is an effective and low-priced method of control.

LITTLE MILLET

Little millet (Panicum sumatrense) cultivation is seen only in India in about 0.5 million ha. The crop is well known in Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa and Gujarat and has localized cultivation in many parts of the country. Its colloquial names are kutki, samai, samalu and same. The crop is strongly associated with tribal agriculture and grown as an important catch crop.

Season: Sowing is done in middle of June in Orissa. In Tamil Nadu, south-west monsoon crop is sown in June and north-east monsoon crop in September—October. For Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and South Bihar sowing during the last week of June to first week of July is desirable to escape damage from shootfly and gall-midge.

Varieties, spacing and seed rate: A number of varieties with high yield potential have been released for different states (Table 32.6.7). The optimum spacing is 22.5 cm between plants within a row. Shallow sowing at a depth of 2—3 cm is optimum for quick establishment of crop. The seed rate of 8 kg/ha for line sowing and 12 kg/ha for broadcasting is optimum.

Cultivation: Apply 5 tonnes of farmyard manure/ha 2-3 weeks prior to sowing. In

1086

addition, application of 20 kg each of N and P,O,/ha is beneficial.

Seed inoculation with Agrobacterium. radiobacter and Aspergillus awamori improves seed yield. Two inter-cultivations and 1 hand-weeding in line-sown crop and 2 hand-weedings in broadcast crop are necessary for effective weed control.

Little millet + blackgram in 2:1 proportion in Orissa; little millet + sesame or soybean or pigeonpea | : 2 proportion in Madhya Pradesh; little millet + pigeonpea in 2: | proportion in south Bihar are profitable. Little millet + niger sequence is adopted in south Bihar.

There are no serious diseases on the crop and shootfly is the only serious pest causing significant yield losses. Early sowing with the onset of monsoon is an effective and low-priced method of control.

NUTRITIONAL COMPOSITION OF MILLET GRAINS

The millet grains compare very well with rice or wheat with respect to their nutrient composition. In fact, most millet grain score over rice/wheat with respect to one or more protective nutrients such as vitamins, minerals, dietary fibre and phyto-chemicals (Table 32.6.8), The millet grain consists of seed-coat, embryo and endosperm. The carbohydrates are the major biochemical constituents followed by lipids and proteins. Starch forms the predominant carbohydrate constituent, though non-starchy polysaccharides account for 20-30% of the total carbohydrates in most of these grains. Lysine happens to be the most limiting amino acid of millet proteins. The anti-nutritional factors, viz. polyphenols, enzyme inhibitors and phytate, are present in these millet grains, mainly in seed-coat and their content is eliminated or reduced by milling or heat treatment.

Source: (i) FAO Nutrition Studies, 1970, Rome, Italy; (ii) Nutritive Value of Indian Foods, 1991, NIN, Hyderabad, India.

Milling, popping and malting are the primary processing technologies applied extensively for millet grains and the products obtained undergo secondary processing for food and feed purposes. Some of them are processed at tertiary level to prepare speciality foods, food industry ingredients and industrial raw materials. The grits/ flour produced are used in the preparation of several traditional food products depending on regional food habits, viz. unleavened bread (rofi), stiff porridge (dumpling) and thin porridge (Gangi). Lack of gluten limits their use in leavened bread but composite flour with wheat enables to prepare bread and other bakery products.

32.7 Pulses

Pulses are important source of dietary protein, and have unique property of maintaining and restoring soil fertility through biological nitrogen fixation as well as conserving, and improving physical properties of soil by virtue of their deep root system and leaf fall. Pulse crops leave behind reasonable quantity of nitrogen in the soil and add up to 40 kg N/ha to it.

India grows pulse crops on 23 million ha area and produces nearly 14-15 million tonnes of pulse grains. The commonly grown pulse crops are: Bengal gram or chickpea or gram (Cicer arietinum), arhar or pigeonpea or tur (Cajanus cajan), mungbean or greengram (Vigna radiata), urdbean or blackgram (Vigna mungo), masur or lentil (Lens culinaris), matar or field pea (Pisum sativum var. arvense), khesari (Lathyrus sativus), cowpea (Vigna unguiculata), mothbean (Vigna aconitifolia) and rajmash or French bean (Phaseolus vulgaris).

BENGAL GRAM

Bengal gram or chickpea _ first domesticated in the Middle East, is widely cultivated in India, Mediterranean region, the Middle East, Ethiopia, Mexico, Argentina, Chile and Peru. It is consumed in various forms, viz. dal, besan (flour), crushed or whole grain boiled or parched, green grain and foliage as vegetable. Germinated seeds have medicinal value. Soaked grain or husk are fed to horses and cattle respectively. The plant is a small herbaceous annual, 25 to 50 cm tall and erect with branched stem. The fruit is an inflated pod about 2 cm long and 1 cm broad. Germination is hypogeal.

Bengal gram is the most important pulse crop of India, and occupies 7.1 million ha area with a production of 5.75 million tonnes, accounting for 30.2% and 25.8% of total pulse area and production respectively. The main Bengal gram-producing states are Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh.

Soil and climate

Bengal gram is grown in all types of soil, viz. heavy clay to light loam, except saline and sodic soils. Well-drained and sandy-loam to deep loam soils of medium fertility are considered ideal for its cultivation. The alluvial soils of the Indo-Gangetic belt support a bumper crop of Bengal gram. Being a winter season (rabi) crop, it is raised on the moisture conserved during the monsoon. It requires cool climate for its growth and development and high temperature for its maturity. However, severe cold and frost at the time of flowering causes flower drop. The optimum temperature for its growth ranges from 15° to 25°C.

Cropping systems

Bengal gram is commonly rotated with maize, pearl millet, rice, cotton, soybean, sorghum (forage or early-maturing grain type), sunflower or niger. In intercropping, it is grown with linseed, wheat, barley, mustard, safflower etc.

1088

1088 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

Cultivation

When grown under rainfed conditions, care must be taken to conserve rainwater. This crop does not need a fine seed-bed. The land should be ploughed by soil-turning plough soon after harvest of rainy season (kharif) crops. If necessary, a pre-sowing irrigation of about 8 cm should be given to ensure adequate moisture in the soil. Subsequently two cross-ploughings or harrowings followed by heavy planking will provide the desired seed-bed. Kabuli gram needs relatively better seed-bed than that of desi type. In rainfed situation, second fortnight of October and in irrigated situation last week of October to second week of November are the proper sowing times. Recently, a few varieties have been developed that can be sown up to the second week of December.

Being capable of fixing atmospheric nitrogen through rhizobial activity, it does not require a large quantity of nitrogen; a small starter dose (15-20 kg/ha) is required for initial growth of plant and development of nodules in roots. Seed treatment with Rhizobium culture is beneficial. The fixation of nitrogen by the rhizobia in the root nodules generally commences 30 days after sowing. On soils with low to medium phosphorus status, crop responds to phosphatic fertilizer up to 60 kg P,O, /ha. Phosphate-solubilizing bacteria (PSB) have been found effective in increasing the efficiency of applied phosphorus. Application of PSB culture with DAP or SSP @ 40 kg P/ha in calcareous soils, where P fixation is common phenomenon, improves the yield of Bengal gram and available phosphorus status of the soil. On soils low in exchangeable potash and sulphur, application of 30-40 kg K,O and 20 kg S/ ha is necessary to obtain good yields. In addition, application of 15 kg ZnSO,/ha, 10 kg borax/ha, 1 kg sodium molybdate, and 1 kg Fe/ha is also recommended for soils deficient in these nutrients. Foliar application of 2% urea or DAP at flowering and early podding improves yield rainfed and late sown crop.

The crop is sown in rows, 30-45 cm apart. Seeds are placed 7—10 cm deep in soil; the rate depends on seed size from 60 to 100 kg/ha. Planting on raised beds (67.5 cm width) accomodating 2 rows is beneficial specially on heavy-textured soils. One hand-weeding 30-40 days after sowing or pre-emergence application of weedicide Pendimethalin @ | kg a.i./ha is recommended for effective control of the weeds.

The crop responds to irrigation 45 days after sowing and at the early podding stage. In the absence of winter rains, irrigation is beneficial.

At maturity, the crop is cut with a sickle, dried on threshing floor and then threshed by trampling it with bullocks. In northern plains, the crop matures in 150-160 days, whereas in Central and South Zones, it matures in 120-125 days. Under irrigated conditions, it yields 1,500 to 2,000 kg of grains/ha but up to 3,000 kg/ha may be obtained under favourable conditions.

Integrated pest management

Pod-borer is the major pest. It requires regular monitoring from flowering onward for eggs and larvae. Sex-pheromone traps (5 traps/ha) should be installed at flower bud initiation stage. Economic threshold limit may be 1-2 larvae/5 to 10 plants.

Cultural practices: Deep summer ploughing, clean cultivation, timely sowing (up

1089

PULSES

to end of October), and intercropping with linseed, mustard, wheat, barley, coriander, safflower etc., minimizes incidence of pod-borers and nematodes.

Mechanical practices: Collect and destroy the grown-up larvae.

Biological control: Conserve natural enemies, viz. Campoletis, predatory wasps and spiders by using eco-friendly insecticides. Install bird’ to encourage insectivorous birds. Intercrop nectar-rich crop like coriander to support natural enemy population of Campoletis chlorideae. stink bugs, s perches

Spray nuclear polyhedrosis virus (NPV) @ 250 larval equivalents (LE)/ha on noticing the first- or second-instar larvae or eggs of Helicoverpa armigera. Apply 3 sprays at weekly intervals. Use of Bacillus thuringiensis formulations, viz. Dipel, Delfin, Biobit, etc. @ 1-1.5 kg a.i/ha is useful.

Chemical control: Selective pesticides, viz. Acephate (0.04%) and neem-seed kernel extract (5%) or other neem-based formulations, viz. Nimbecidine, Repelin, Achook, Neemguard etc., should be used as soon as economic threshold level is attained. In case of severe outbreak, spray of Imidacloprid (0.02%) should be given.

Soil treatment with Chlorpyriphos may be done for control of termites and cutworm.

In standing crop, charging of irrigation water with Chlorpyriphos is recommended.

Disease management

The major diseases are Ascochyta blight in North-west plains zone and wilt in Central zone.

Wilt and root rot: Seed should be treated with fungicides viz. Carbendazim+Thiram (1 g+2 g/kg) at sowing. Seed-dressing with bioagent Trichoderma virens @ 0.5 g/kg or T. harzianium or T. viride @ 4 g/kg seed +fungicide Carboxin (Vitavex) @ 1 g/kg seed should be followed.

The resistant varieties of Bengal gram are given here zone-wise.

North-West Plains Zone : GNG 146, PBG 1, Haryana Chana 1, GF 89-36, Pusa 362,BG 372, GNG 663, GNG 469, DCP 92-3, Vijay

North-East Plains Zone : Avarodhi, KWR 108, KPG 59, K 850, Pusa 1003, Haryana Chana |

Central Zone: JG 315, ICCV 10 (Bharati), Pusa 391, ICCV 2, Vijay, Vishwas, Phule G5, BG 244, H 355, SAKI 9218, JG 74, Gujarat Gram 1

South Zone: Bharati, ICCC 4, JG 11, CO 3, Annegiri 1.

Ascochyta blight: Seed treatment with Hexacap (3 g/kg seed), Carbendazim (2 g/ kg seed) or Calixin-M (Tridemorph 2 g/kg seed) is effective.

Foliar sprays of Calixin-M (Tridemorph 0.1%) or Hexacap (0.02%) or Carbendazim (0.1%) may be adopted.

Grow disease-resistant varieties, viz. 469. Gaurav, PBG 1, Haryana Chana 1 and GNG

Botrytis gray mould: It is an important disease in sub-mountaneous (farai) regions which appears sometimes when humidity is high. For the control of seed-borne infection, seed treatment with. Carbendazim or Thiabendazole @ 2-3 g/kg seed is advised. For the management of secondary infection, sparaying of Mancozeb (2.5 g/ litre water) @ 400 litre solution /ha is beneficial.

1090

1092

(panuquoo 1'2'Z€

1094

1095

PULSES

Varieties

A number of improved varieties have been developed and released for cultivation in different zones. These varieties have wide adaptability and higher yield potential. Since 1980, varieties resistant or tolerant to major diseases have been released, which have replaced the old and susceptible ones. Disease-resistant varieties have been listed under disease management. Varieties suitable for late-sown conditions are Haryana Chana 1, Uday and Pusa 372, which can be grown after the harvest of rice. The popular and released varieties including recent ones are given in Table 32.7.1.

PIGEONPEA

Pigeonpea or arhar or tur is native to India. It is cultivated throughout in the tropical and sub-tropical regions and warmer temperate regions from 30° N to 30° S. Plant is woody perennial, but often grown as annual. The pods are straight and flattened, slightly hairy, 4-5 cm long, and have pronounced, pointed beak. There is much variation in the shape and colour of the pods, and size of the seeds, which are usually spherical or oval and white, brown, red or specked with white hilum. Germination is hypogeal.

Pigeonpea occupies 3.75 million ha area with production of 3.1 million tonnes. Itis mainly grown in Maharashtra, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, Chhattisgarh and Bihar. In Punjab, Haryana, Gujarat and western Uttar Pradesh, early-maturing varieties are grown.

It is consumed extensively as dal. In some parts of India green pods are used as vegetable. The pod husk and seed husk are used as feed for cattle. The dry sticks are used for thatching purpose. The deep roots open the soil and improve physical properties of the soil. The plants shed large amount of leaves, which add organic matter to soil.

Soil and climate

Pigeonpea is cultivated in wide range of climatic conditions in tropical and subtropical areas with a temperature range of 20°-40°C. It is hardy to both low (5° 10°C) and high temperatures up to 40°C. The plant is sensitive to frost during all stages of its growth. In frost-prone areas like Punjab and Haryana short duration varieties are grown, as they escape frost. It is grown on a wide variety of soils from sandy (provided it does not contain excess of sodium chloride) to heavy clay loams that are well drained. The plant also thrives in regions of heavy rainfall and under irrigation, provided there is no standing water on the ground even for a few days. It is sensitive to frost during all stages of its growth.

Cropping systems

Long duration pigeonpea is invariably grown as mixed/intercrop with coarse cereals, oilseeds, short duration pulses and upland rice. The short duration pigeonpea is often grown as a_ sole crop in rotation with wheat. Sometimes, it is intercropped with greengram, blackgram, maize (early) etc.

Cultivation

The short duration pigeonpea is generally cultivated in irrigated situations. It is sown in the first week of June in Punjab and Haryana and in the second fortnight of

1096 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

1096

June in Uttar Pradesh and northern Rajasthan. Early planting ensures timely sowing of succeeding wheat crop. Medium duration varieties are grown both as a sole crop and mixed/intercrop. The medium and long duration pigeonpea is sown with the onset of monsoon, preferably by the first week of July. Some of the long duration varieties like Sharad, Pusa 9 etc., can be grown in the first fortnight of September as pre-rabi crop.

The tillage requirement of pigeonpea depends on the soil type and the preceding crop. A weed-free and firm seed-bed ensures better plant stand and early vigour to the crop. This is achieved by opening the soil through soil-turning plough or disc harrow, followed by the cross-harrowing or ploughing with desi plough on or before the onset of monsoon. Finally the seed-bed should be planked and levelled. It is desirable to provide a gentle slope to land for proper drainage. Sowing pigeonpea on ridges is recommended as it facilitates proper drainage and ensure good plant stand.

The seed rate for short duration pigeonpea is 15-18 kg/ha, whereas for long duration, it is 10-12 kg/ha. Seed treatment with Rhizobium culture is beneficial. The recommended fertilizer dose is 15-20 kg N, 40-60 kg P,O,, 20 kg K,O and 20 kg S/ ha. Use of PSB culture improves the available phosphorus status in the soil. In addition, application of 15 kg ZnSO,, 10 kg borax, 1 kg sodium molybdate, and 1 kg Fe/ha is also recommended for proper growth of plants and higher yield. The row-to-row and plant-to-plant spacings for short duration pigeonpea and pre-rabi crop are 50 cm x 15 cm and 30 cm x 10 cm, whereas for medium and long duration varieties, 60 cm x 20 cm and 75 cm x 25 cm respectively. Hand weeding at 30-45 days after sowing or pre- emergence application of Pendimethalin @ 1-1.5 kg/ha provides effective control of weeds.

Short duration varieties are harvested in the middle or end of November, whereas medium and long duration varieties by January-March. When more than 80% pods are mature, the plants are cut close to the ground and bundled. These are taken to threshing floor and staked upright, dried for a few days and beaten on drums/ planks to separate pods. The resultant material, ie. pods and dry leaves, is beaten with sticks or is trampled by bullocks. The seeds and husk are separated by winnowing.

The average yield of sole short duration pigeonpea is 1,200—1,500 kg/ha and that of long duration pigeonpea is 1,800 to 2,500 kg/ha.

Integrated pest management

The major diseases of pigeonpea are wilt, sterility mosaic and Phytophthora stem blight. Use of resistant varieties is the best option in disease-prone areas. The key insect -pests in short duration pigeonpea are pod borer (Helicoverpa armigera), spotted borer (Maruca vitrata) and leaf tier (Eucosma critica) whereas in medium and long duration pigeonpea, pod-fly (Melanagromyza obtusa) and pod-borer (Helicoverpa) are the major pests.

Pest monitoring is an integral part of pest management. Regular field visits and monitoring of insects through pheromone or light traps are essential. The integrated pest-management strategy consists of cultural, mechanical, biological and chemical contro] measures.

1098

PULSES

1099

Cultural practices: Synchrony in sowing, maturity and harvesting of crop in a given area helps in reducing insect damage, especially of pod-borer and pod-fly. Intercropping with sorghum helps in reducing wilt and pod-borer incidence. In the late-maturing crop, relatively medium-late varieties, viz. Bahar would escape major damage from pod-borer in the North-East Plains Zone.

Planting of castor and tall sorghum or maize varieties on borders conserves natural enemies viz. predators, birds, etc. and also serves as perch after removing cobs. To facilitate spraying, short-statured crops e.g. cowpea, greengram, blackgram, fodder soybean, etc. may be grown in 1 m wide land after every 8-10 rows of pigeonpea. Trap crop e.g. giant African marigold, may be grownas border. After heavy oviposition, the flowers may be plucked and disposed off.

Mechanical practices: Remove and destroy the plants affected with sterility mosaic during crop season and off-season. Destroy crop residues infected with diseases and nematodes. For insect-pests, e.g. blister beetle, leaf binders, hairy caterpillar and lepidopteran larvae etc., hand-picking and jarring on cloth sheets or in bags is also effective.

Biological control: Spiders, Campoletis and predatory wasps and birds bring down the pest population. Indiscriminate use of pesticides should be avoided to conserve them. Seed treatment with bioagent Trichoderma spp. @ 4 g/kg seed + fungicide Vitavex @ 1g/kg seed would check the incidence of wilt and root rot.

Chemical control: Seed treatment with 1 g Carbendazim +2 g Thiram/kg seed is effective for wilt or root rot control. For management of Phytopthora blight, seed treatment with Metalaxyl (6 g/kg seed) + ridge planting + cover crop like soybean, urdbean, mungbean and cowpea would be useful. For control of pod-fly, spray Dimethoate (0.03%). For control of Maruca and leaf tier, selective pesticides like Dichlorvos (0.04%) and Profenophos (0.04%) should be used. For pod-borer, Acephate (0.04%) effective pesticide. If pod-borer (Helicoverpa) is the major pest, spray of 5% neem-seed -kernel extract at flowering/pdding stage is effective and safe.

Summer fallow or solarization of soil using transparent polyethelene mulch for 15 days, adoption of rotation and removal of roots of previously harvested crop from soil are all helpful in reducing nematode infestation.

Varieties

The short duration varieties, e.g. Pusa 992, UPAS 120, Manak, Paras, ICPL 151 and AL 201, are suitable for rotation with wheat (Table 32.7.2). Wilt-resistant varieties are: Asha (ICPL 87119), BDN 1, BDN 2, C 11, JA4, TT 6, BSMR 853, JA 4, MA 3, MA 6, Narendra Arhar 1, Maruti (ICP 8863), BSMR 736 etc. Varieties resistant to sterility mosaic are: Bahar, Asha, Sharad, Pusa 9, Narendra Arhar 1, Amar, BSMR 175, BSMR 736, BSMR 853, MA3 and MA 6. Recently, a CMS- based short duration hybrid, GTH 1 has been released and notified for cultivation in Central India. This is the world’s first CMS-based hybrid.

GREENGRAM

Greengram or mungbean is of ancient cultivation in India. It was introduced early into southern China, Indochina and Java. In recent times, it has been introduced into East and Central Africa, the West Indies and the United States. Plant is annual, herbaceous,

1100

erect or semi-erect, 45-120 cm tall, sometimes with slight tendency of twining. Numerous slightly hairy peduncles, straight pods around 10 cm long without a beak are produced on each flowering axis, they are often pendent and each contains 10-15 green or golden yellow seeds which have flat white hilum. The germination is epigeal.

In India, greengram (mungbean) occupies 3.3 million ha area and contributes to 1.1 million tonnes in pulse production. In northern region, it is grown during kharif, but is also grown in spring or summer season in irrigated northern plains and as rabi crop in southern and south-eastern parts, where the winter is quite mild.

The grains (whole or split) are used as dal or to make flour. The straw and husk are used as fodder for cattle. The germinated grains are also used as sprouts. Unlike other pulses, it does not produce flatulence.

Soil and climate

Being a tropical crop it cannot tolerate low temperature. It thrives well at 25°- 35°C. In northern plains, it can be grown in spring, summer and kharif whereas in southern parts it can be grown throughout the year as the variation in temperature is not much. Greengram is cultivated on a wide variety of soils, ranging from sandy to heavy loam. Deep, well-drained loam soils of the alluvial tracts are, however, ideal. The crop also performs well on shallow and eroded soils and is considered as a good cover crop. It is very sensitive to waterlogging.

Cropping system

Greengram—mustard, greengram-safflower, greengram—linseed and greengram— wheat are common rotations. In kharif, intercropping with maize, sesame, pearl millet, sorghum, pigeonpea and cotton is common. Spring or summer greengram is grown as a catch crop. Greengram—maize—wheat, greengram-rice—wheat, greengram—maize— toria—wheat, greengram—maize—potato—wheat sequences have been successful. In spring-planted sugarcane, it is also grown as an intercrop. During rabi, it is grown in rice fallows of southern and south-eastern region.

Cultivation

There is generally no need ofa fine bed for sowing this crop. Depending on the soil type and preceding crop, 2-3 ploughings or harrowings followed by planking are adequate. When the crop is grown as an intercrop, the tillage requirement of the main crop decides the field operations. It is desirable to have a weed-free seed-bed with adequate drainage facilities during kharif. For spring or summer cultivation, irrigation should be given soon after harvesting the rabi crop. When the soil touches proper tilth, the land should be prepared with cross harrowing. The sowing time is the first fortnight of March for the spring greengram, last week of March to first fortnight of April for the summer crop. In kharif, seed is sown with the onset of monsoon, preferably third week of June to mid-July. In the event of the late onset of monsoon, it can be sown by July end. In rabi, seed can be sown from September to December or January, depending on the time of rice harvest and availability of irrigation. The seed rate is 25-30 kg/ha for spring or summer and 15-20 kg/ha for kharif and rabi. The row-to row distance for spring or summer is 25 cm and for kharifand rabi is 30-45 cm. The recommended fertilizer dose is 10-15 kg N, 20 kg P,O,, 20 kg K,O and 20 kg S /ha. Use of PSB culture improves

available phosphorus in the soil. Foliar spray of 2% urea at flowering enhances grain yield under rainfed conditions and also in rice fallows.

The control of weeds during 30-40 days after sowing is very beneficial. The young crop is given one hand-weeding or hoeing. Use of weedicide Pendimethalin @ 1.0- 1.5 kg a.i/ha immediately after sowing is also useful.

The crop matures in 75-85 days in kharif and 65-70 days in spring season. It is harvested when more than 80% pods mature. One or two rounds of picking of pods are also recommended to avoid losses due to shattering. The plants are cut with sickle and dried on the threshing floor. These are then threshed by beating with sticks or by trampling with bullocks. The seeds are separated from husk by winnowing. The average yield varies from 6 to 8 q/ha. However, yields up to 10-15 q/ha can be obtained with better management.

Integrated pest management

The major diseases of greengram are mungbean yellow mosaic virus (MYMV), Cercospora leaf spot, powdery mildew and Macrophomina blight. Yellow mosaic is a major disease in northern and central parts, and powdery mildew in southern parts. The important insect -pests are jassids, whitefly, stemfly, hairy caterpillar and thrips. The integrated pest management strategy consists of cultural, mechanical, biological and chemical control measures.

Cultural practices: Deep ploughing and timely sowing are good for crop health. In disease-prone areas, resistant varieties should be used. The varieties resistant to MYMV and powdery mildew disease are mentioned under the head ‘varieties’.

Mechanical practices: Hairy catterpillars have a definite egg-laying pattern in masses. The first stage of larvae remains restricted to leaves of plants where eggs were laid. Collect and destroy them.

Biological control: Natural enemies and birds reduce the pest population.

Chemical control: For control of thrips, stemfly, jassids and whitefly, apply Phorate in soil before or at sowing @ 1 kg a.i./ha. Seed treatment with Phorate or Disulfotone @ 2% weight basis is also effective. Spraying with Quinalphos (0.05%) controls the leaf defoliators and hairy caterpillars. Dusting with 5% Malathion @ 35-40 kg/ha is also effective against hairy caterpillars.

For managing Cercospora leaf spot, apply foliar spray of fungicides, Carbendazim (0.05%) or Mancozeb (0.2%) at the first notice of disease. Need-based sprays may be applied subsequently at interval of 10-15 days.

For control of powdery mildew, apply foliar spray of wettable sulphur @ 3 g/litre or Carbendazim @ 0.5g/litre of water at the first notice of disease symptoms. If needed, further sprays may be applied at an interval of 10-15 days.

For controlling macrophomina blight, apply foliar spray of Carbendazim (0.05%) at the first notice of disease. If needed, further sprays may be applied at an interval of 15 days.

Varieties

Some of the varieties resistant to mungbean yellow mosaic virus are ML 337, ML 131, ML 267, Pant Mung 2, Pant Mung 3, MUM 2, ML 668, Pant Mung 5, Pant

1102

Mung 4, Meha, Narendra Mung | for kharif and SML 668 and Samrat for spring or summer (Table 32.7.3). Varieties Pusa 9072 and TARM | which are resistant to powdery mildew should be grown during rabi.

BLACKGRAM OR URDBEAN

Blackgram or urdbean is of ancient cultivation in India. Although introduced in southern United States, the West Indies and other tropical areas, the crop is extensively cultivated in India. Plant is densely hairy, annual with growth-habit which varies from erect to spreading. The pods are narrow, cylindrical and up to 6 cm long with a terminal, hooked beak. The matured pods are held erect. Each one contains 6 to 10 seeds, which are square or oblong, and black with a pronounced white concave hilum. Germination is hypogeal.

Blackgram, occupies 3.2 million ha area and contributes 1.33 million tonnes to pulse production. Like greengram, it is cultivated mainly as kharif crop almost in all states and has a premier place in hill agriculture. In northern plains, it is also cultivated during spring as a catch crop. In southern and south-eastern regions, it is cultivated in rice fallows during rabi. :

The grains (whole or split) are used as dal or made into flour. Various preparations are made from its flour, e.g. papad, barian, dosa, vada etc.

Soil and climate

Compared to mungbean, it has wider adaptability. It is comparatively more tolerant to waterlogging than mungbean. During kharif, it is cultivated throughout the country. It is best suited to rice fallows during rabi in southern and south-eastern parts of India.

Blackgram needs relatively heavier soils than greengram. Well-drained, moisture retentive, deep loam soils free from excessive soluble salts and sodicity are ideal. The crop, however, thrives well on marginal lands and protects eroded soils. It is grown as a rainfed crop in the warm plains as well as in the foot-hills and up to an altitude of 2,000 m.

Cropping system

Blackgram and greengram are mutually replaceable in various systems, except that the water requirement of blackgram crop is slightly more than that of greengram. Both fit well with spring-planted sugarcane. However, blackgram is not suitable for summer cultivation due to its long duration (75-90 days).

Cultivation

Land preparation, manuring, sowing, interculture, harvesting and threshing are similar to those described for greengram. Seed rate is 15-20 kg/ha for kharif and 25- 30 kg/ha for spring or rabi. Row-to-row distance is 30-35 cm for kharif and 25 cm for rabi or spring. The yield is around 10-12 q/ha.

Integrated pest management

The major diseases are mungbean yellow mosaic in northern plains and powdery mildew in southern and south-eastern regions (in rabi). The pests are also common, which are controlled as mentioned for greengram.

1106

1107

The IPM strategy is as follows:

Cultural practices: Deep ploughing and timely sowing are helpful for good crop health. The resistant varieties to yellow mosaic virus are Uttara, Narendra Urd 1, IPU 92-43, Pant U 19, Pant U 30, UG 218 and WBU 108.

The resistant varieties to powdery mildew are LBG 402, TPU 4 and LBG 17. Mechanical practices: Hairy caterpillars have definite egg-laying pattern in masses. The first stage larvae remain restricted to leaves of plants where eggs are laid. Collect and destroy them.

Chemical practices: For control of thrips, stem-fly, jassids and whitefly, apply Phorate in soil before or at sowing @ 1 kg a.i,/ha. It will also help in reducing yellow vein mosaic.

For managing Cercospora leaf spot, apply foliar spray of fungicides, Carbendazim (0.05%) or Mancozeb (0.2%) at the first notice of disease. Need-based sprays may be applied subsequently at interval of 10-15 days.

For control of powdery mildew, apply foliar spray of wettable sulphur @ 3 g/litre or Carbendazim @ 0.5g/litre of water at the first notice of disease symptoms. If needed, further sprays may be applied at an interval of 10-15 days.

For Controlling macrophomina blight, apply foliar spray of Carbendazim (0.05%) at the first notice of disease. If needed, further sprays may be applied at an interval of 15 days.

Varieties

In general, varieties with black seeds are grown but in some regions, varieties with green seeds are also grown (Table 32.7.4). The varieties resistant to yellow mosaic are listed under integrated pest management. The powdery mildew-resistant variety LBG 17 is suitable for rabi in southern zone, and varieties PDU 1 and Mash 414 are suitable for spring season.

LENTIL

Lentil or masur is one of the oldest crops, that originated in Near East and Mediterranean region. It was known to ancients in Egypt and Greece. It had spread to Europe, India and China, and now it is introduced and cultivated in most sub-tropical and warm temperate regions. Plant is a small, green annual herb with branched stem. It is rarely taller than 40 cm. The pod is flattened and broad about 12 mm long, tipped by a minute beak. The seeds are lens-shaped, light red, brown, grey and of tan speckled with black. Germination is hypogeal.

Lentil is recognized as one of the most nutritious pulse crops, ranking next to chickpea (gram) amongst rabi pulses. It is grown throughout northern and central India. It occupies 1.52 million ha and contributes 0.95 million tonnes to pulse production. It is mainly cultivated in Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal, with 85% of total lentil production. Grains are used as dal (whole or dehulled) and are also used in other preparations, i.e. dal-moth.

Soil and climate

Lentil is grown on a wide range of soils ranging from light loamy sand to heavy clay soil in northern parts, and in moderately deep, light black soils in Madhya Pradesh and

1108

Maharashtra. Its range ofcultivation extends to an altitude of 3,500 m in north-west hills. The optimum temperature for its growth and development ranges from 15 to 25°C.

Cropping systems

Lentil is generally grown as rainfed crop during rabi after rice, maize and pearl millet. In intercropping it is grown with barley, linseed and mustard. It is also grown as an intercrop in autumn-planted sugarcane. In north-eastern plains, it is also grown as utera crop after rice. The seeds are broadcast in standing crop of rice just before harvest.

Cultivation

It resembles gram (chickpea) in habit and cultivation requirement. After harvest of Kharif crop, land should be ploughed once with soil-turning plough. This should follow cross-harrowing and planking. The recommended dose of fertilizers is 20 kg N, 40 kg P,O, 20 kg K,O and 20 kg Sha. In soils, low in Zn, soil application of 20 kg ZnSO, is recommended under rainfed and late sown conditions; foliar spray of 2% urea improves yield. The seed is sown in the second fortnight of October under rainfed conditions. However, it can be sown in the first week of November in irrigated areas. Under late-sown conditions, the seed can be sown up to 15 December. The seed rate is 30-40 kg/ha for small-seeded varieties and 50-60 kg/ha for bold-seeded varieties, and row-to-row spacing is 25 cm. Raised bed planting is beneficial than flat bed sowing, One weeding 30-40 days after sowing or use of weedicide (Pendimethalin @ 1.0 1.25 kg/ha) immediately after sowing helps in controlling weeds. In the absence of winter rains, light irrigation 40-45 days after sowing and at pod-formation stage is beneficial. When more than 80% pods matures, it is cut with a sickle, dried on the threshing floor and threshed by beating with sticks or trampling with bullocks. The average yield is 8 to 10 q/ha under rainfed and 12-15 q/ha under irrigated conditions. Under good management, it may yield up to 20 q/ha.

Disease and pest management

The major diseases of lentil are rust in northern plains and wilt in Central zone. Use of resistant varieties is helpful in controlling the disease. Pests are not a major problem in lentil. In some years aphid population rises due to rise in temperature during January or February, and causes heavy damage. Spray of Monocrotophos (0.04%) is effective for aphid control.

Varieties

The small-seeded varieties resistant to rust are PL 406, PL 639, PL 4 and L 4147, and bold-seeded varieties resistant to rust and tolerant to wilt are L 4076, LH 84-8, DPL 15, IPL 406, DPL 62 and JL3 (Table 32.7.5).

FIELD PEA

Field pea or pea, originated in Europe and Western Asia, is grown throughout the world as a cool season crop. It is an important crop of cool regions, and in India, it is cultivated on 0.78 million ha with annual production of 0.71 million tonnes. It is mainly grown in Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan, Jammu and Kashmir and Madhya Pradesh. It is a high-yielding pulse crop. Unripe pods are used as green

1109

PULSES

1110

vegetable and dry seeds are used for dal and chat after boiling. Other parts are used for feeding cattle.

Plant is herbaceous annual, climbing by means of leaflet tendrils, glabrous with or without wax covering. Pods are swollen or compressed, straight or curved. On short stalks with as many as 10 seeds. Seeds are angular or globose; and smooth or wrinkled. Germination is hypogeal.

Soil and climate

This crop grows best in areas having 15°-25°C for 4-5 months. It can be grown on a variety of soils; however, deep loamy soils of Indo-Gangetic plains are the best. The crop can withstand mild alkaline conditions but does not thrive well on acidic soils.

Field pea is more adapted than chickpea crop to high input conditions. The common rotation are maize-pea, rice-pea and cotton-pea. Generally, it is grown as a sole crop. Sometimes, it is mixed with mustard and wheat.

Cultivation

Field pea needs relatively better seed-bed. After harvest of kharif crops, the land should be ploughed deep with soil-turning plough and then prepared with 2-3 harrowings or ploughings, followed by planking. In rice fields, efforts must be made to break clods and attain friable structure. Optimum moisture must be ensured for proper germination. The recommended dose of fertilizers is 20-40 kg N, 60 kg P₂O, 20 kg K₂O and 20 kg S/ha. Use of PSB culture improves the status of available phosphorus in the soil. In addition, application of 15 kg zinc sulphate, 10 kg borax, 1 kg sodium molybdate is beneficial wherever soil is deficient in these micronutrients. Foliar spray of 2% urea at flowering/pod initiation improves yield particularly under late sown conditions. The seed rate is 70-80 kg/ha. Seed treatment with Rhizobium culture is beneficial. The seed is sown in lines at 30 cm row-to-row distance.Planting on raised beds (67.5 cm wide with 2 rows of pea) improves yield and economizes irrigation water. In the absence of winter rains, irrigations 40-45 days after sowing and at pod-formation stage are required. The crop receiving irrigation remains protected against frost to a greater extent. One hand-weeding 30-45 days after sowing or application of Pendimethalin @ 1.0-1.5 kg a.i./ha soon after sowing helps in controlling the weeds. The crop matures in 130-140 days. In dwarf varieties, interculture operations are convenient.

When the crop matures, plants are cut with sickles and taken to threshing floor, dried and threshed by beating with sticks or trampling by bullocks. The average yield under irrigation is 15-20 q/ha.

The major disease of field pea is powdery mildew, which causes heavy losses in yield. The varieties resistant to powdery mildew should be used to control the disease. In some parts of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, crop is affected by rust disease. In those areas rust-tolerant varieties like HUDP 15, IPF 99-25, IPFD 1-10 and IPF 99-13 should

1112 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

be grown. There is no major pest damage in field pea. However, sometimes, crop is affected by stem-fly. Seed treatment with Phorate 2% is beneficial.

Varieties

The improved varieties resistant to powdery mildew are Rachna, Pant P 5, HUP 2, KFP 103, DMR 7, KPMP 522, Prakash, IPF 99-25, Pant P 42, VL 47 and dwarf varieties are Aparna, Uttara, HUDP 15, IPFD 99-13, IPFD 1-10 and DDR 27 (Table 32.7.6).

LATHYRUS

Lathyrus or khesari is considered as the drought-tolerant and hardy crop, and is grown in low-rainfall regions under rainfed conditions during winter or rabi. It is considered to be the native of southern Europe and Western Asia. It is cultivated in central, south and east Europe, India, Bangladesh, Iran, Middle East and South America. In addition to use as dal and chapati, it is also used as fodder. Its grains and other parts contain a neuro-toxin called ODAP (8N-oxalyl-2-c, 8-diamino-propionic acid), which causes lathyrism, characterized by paralysis of the lower limbs. In India, a variety, Bio L 212 (Ratan) with very low ODAP content (0.04%) has been recently released, which is quite safe. Plant is herbaceous, annual with slender, glabrous, well branched, winged procumbent stems. Pods are flattened, oblong, up to 4 cm long, two winged dorsally, up to five seeded. Seeds are wedge shaped, angular, white or brown sometimes mottled. Germination is hypogeal. In India, Lathyrus occupies 0.85 million ha with a production of 0.49 million tonnes. It is extensively grown in Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, eastern Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Maharashtra, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh.

Soil and climate

It is a cold-weather crop, sown in September—October. It grows abundantly in loamy or sandy-loam soils. Deep black soils also produce excellent crop. Being a hardy crop, it can also be grown in marginal lands.

Cropping system

It is grown either as a mono crop or as a second crop after rice. However, it is mainly grown as utera crop after rice, because of its ability to withstand high moisture at sowing time and moisture stress during growth period. This crop is unique in tolerance to adverse environmental conditions, tolerating not only drought but also waterlogging and high temperature.

Cultivation

The crop is sown in conserved moisture after rains. Two or three ploughings are given soon after rains. The seed is broadcast or is sown in rows using seed rate of 50— 75 kg/ha. The recommended row-to-row distance is 30 cm. When grown as utera after rice, the seed is broadcast in the standing crop of rice 5 to 10 days before harvesting. Fertilizers @ 20 kg N, 40 kg P,O,, 20 kg K,Oand 20 kg S/ha are recommended. Hand-weeding 30-40 days after sowing is beneficial. Under utera system, foliar spray of 2% urea or DAP is recommended.

The crop when ready is cut with sickle, dried on the threshing floor and threshed

1113

PULSES

by trampling with bullocks. The average grain yield of 400-500 kg/ha is obtained. In favourable season 1,000 to 1,500 kg/ha yield can be obtained.

Varieties

The Bio L 212 (Ratan) has been recently released for north-east plains and Central Zone to replace the local and old varieties. This variety has high yield potential with very low (<0.04%) ODAP (a toxin) content, whereas traditional old land races have 0.4-0.6% ODAP.

FRENCH BEAN

French bean or rajmash is widely cultivated in the tropics, sub-tropics and temperate regions. It is native to the new world, probably central Mexico or Guatemala. It has spread to Europe, Africa and other parts of the old world.

Plants may be bushy or climbing type. Bushy cultivars are day neutral, early maturing, dwarf plants, 20-60 cm tall with lateral and terminal inflorescence and consequently of determinate growth habit. Climbing cultivars are indeterminate, and may grow 2-3 m tall if they have support to climb by twining. The pods are slender, 10-20 cm long, straight or curved and terminated by a pointed beak. They contain 4— 6 seeds which vary greatly in size and colour. Germination is epigeal.

In India, French bean or rajmash is mainly grown as a kharif crop in the hilly Himalayan region and Satara district of Maharashtra. In foot-hills, it is grown as spring crop. However, it has a great potential in irrigated areas of northern plains as a rabi crop. Now varieties are available for cultivation in North-east plains and Central zone during rabi.

Soil and climate

The crop can be grown in light loamy sand to clay soil under adequate moisture. It is highly sensitive to frost and waterlogging. The ideal temperature range for proper growth of this crop is 10°-27°C. Above 30°C, the flower drop is a serious problem. Similarly, below 5°C the flowers and developing pods are damaged.

Cultivation

Field should be well prepared for sowing. The crop is sown in the first week of July in the hills, in the second fortnight of March in lower hills, and in the second fortnight of October in plains. The seed rate of 100-120 kg/ha is appropriate. Plants are sown in rows at 30-40 cm distance. Seeds of French bean are large and slippry, hence, seeds should be placed 8 cm deep in the soil. Raised bed planting improves yield and economizes irrigation water. One hand-weeding or hoeing 30-35 days after sowing or application of weedicide Pendimethalin @ 1.0-1.5 kg a.i./ha immediately after sowing helps in control of weeds. The crop requires adequate moisture. In plains 3-4 irrigations are required. First irrigation at 25-30 days crop stage is most critical. The crop requires higher dose of fertilizers, since suitable strains of Rhizobium are not presently available, about 120 kg N is recommended. Half the nitrogen is applied basal and half for topdressing. Along with N, 60 kg P,O,, 40 kg K,O and 20 kg S/ha should be applied basal. The crop matures in 125-130 days. The plants are cut with sickle and taken to the threshing floor and dried. Mature pods may shatter and therefore, harvesting

1114 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

should not be delayed. The threshing is done by beating with sticks or trampling it under bullocks. The average yield of 15-20 q/ha is obtained. Under good management conditions, 25-30 q yield/ha is obtained.

Disease management

Bean Common Mosaic is the major disease of French bean. Affected plants should be removed and spray Dimecron or Nuvocron @ 1.5 ml/litre. Use resistant varieties like Utkarsh and Ambar.

Varieties

The recommended varieties vary in seed-coat colour, the red seed-coat colour in general is preferred (Table 32.7.7).

COWPEA

Cowpea or /obia is native to Africa and Asia, now cultivated throughout the tropics and sub-tropics. It is used as pulse, green vegetable, fodder and green manure. It is of considerable importance in dryland farming. Plants are usually glabrous, annual herbs, with a strong taproot with many branches in the surface soil. Pods vary greatly in size and colour, the seeds are white, brown, red, black or variously mottled and spotted. Germination is epigeal. It is mainly grown in Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and Kerala.

1115

PULSES

Soil and climate

Cowpea is adapted to a variety of soil types, viz. red loam, black clayey loam, coarse gravel, sandy loams, light sandy soils, etc. It is also grown in poor gravelly slopy lands in hilly tracts and the heavy loam soils. It is more tolerant to heavy rainfall than the other pulse crops; it suffers from water stagnation and heavy drought. It thrives well between 21° and 35°C,

Cropping system

Cowpea is raised usually as a dryland kharif crop and can also be grown as pre- monsoon and late-monsoon crop. It is also grown as second crop during rabi after rice in southern parts of the country.

Cultivation

The land preparation, harvesting and threshing are similar to those described under greengram. The row-to-row spacing is 30-45 cm. The recommended seed rate is 20— 25 kg/ha. Grain yield up to 10 q/ha is obtained.

Varieties

The improved varieties are resistant to diseases, are tall and red seeded (Table 32.7.8).

MOTHBEAN

It is native to India and is mainly grown in arid and semi-arid regions of the country. It has spread to Africa and Southern United States. It is the most drought-tolerant crop of the kharif pulses. It occupies 0.89 million ha with a production of 0.5 milllion tonnes. Rajasthan and Maharashtra are the major growing states. Having oat-like growth habit, it is useful against wind erosion in sandy areas. Plant is annual, much branched, spreading and hairy with a more or less erect main stem, up to 30 cm tall. Pods are thin, hairy, beaked, 2—6 cm long. Pods contain 4 to 9 rectangular small seeds, which are grey, black or mottled. Germination is epigeal.

Soil and climate

It is generally cultivated on poor, light soils. Light sandy-loam soils are considered best for mothbean. It prefers well-distributed moderate rainfall. It is grown alone or as subsidiary to millets and cotton.

Cultivation

The crop needs minimum field operations and matures in October or November. Two ploughings or harrowings, followed by planking provide the desirable seed-bed. The seed is sown with the advent of monsoon. The seed rate of 15—18 kg/ha is used. The row-to-row spacing is 30 cm. Application of 10 kg N and 20 kg P,O, improves yield. No weeding or interculture is given. The mature plants are cut with sickle, dried and threshed. The average yield of 2-5 q/ha is obtained.

Varieties

The improved varieties are disease resistant, and are high yielding (Table 32.7.9).

1116

1119

PULSES

HORSEGRAM

Horsegram or kulthi is native to old world tropics, and is extensively cultivated in dry areas in India, Australia, Myanmar, Sri Lanka and Himalayas. Like mothbean, this crop is also drought tolerant and hardy. It is also grown to provide feed and fodder for cattle and horses. Horsegram possesses medicinal properties also. Plant is an annual herb, slender, with slightly twining branches, semi-erect, low growing habit 30-50 cm high. Pods are short, 3-5 cm long, linear, with secured beak and 57 seeds. Seeds are flattened, thomboidal 3-6 mm long, light red brown, black or mottled. In India, it occupies 1.88 million ha with a production of 0.89 million tonnes. It is extensively grown in dry areas of Kamataka, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Gujarat; in northern parts, it is cultivated in Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and foot-hills of Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and Asom hills.

Soil and climate

The crop is grown as dryland crop under low rainfall (less than 100 cm), over a wide range of soils, except in alkaline areas. It survives on poor and marginal soils, but cannot tolerate waterlogging. The most ideal temperature for the crop is 20°-34°C.

Cropping system

Crop is grown as pure crop as well as mixed crop with sorghum, pearl millet, pigeonpea, sesame or niger. The time of sowing differs in different regions. In Tamil Nadu, it is sown in September—November. In Maharashtra, horsegram is sown as a kharif crop, mixed with bajra or sometimes niger and also in the rabi in rice fallows. In Madhya Pradesh it is a rabi crop. In northern parts it is grown as kharif crop. In West Bengal the sowing period is October-November.

Cultivation

The crop needs minimum field operations. Only 1 or 2 ploughings followed by planking provide the desirable seed-bed. It is grown as pure crop as well as mixed crop with sorghum, pearl millet, pigeonpea, sesame or niger. The crop is seldom manured, however, application of 10 kg N and 20 kg P/ha improves yield. The seeds are broadcast or sown in rows. The row-to-row spacing is 45 cm. The seed rate is 22-30 kg/ha. One hoeing or weeding at an early stage is beneficial. An average yield of 7-8 q/ha is obtained.

Varieties

Improved varieties developed through selection are given in Table 32.7.10.