SOURCE_DOCUMENT: Chapter_2.pdf

2. Weather and Agriculture

Crop growth and development are primarily governed by environmental conditions of soil and weather. The success or failure of farming and qualitative and quantitative improvement in crop production are intimately related to the prevailing weather conditions. Vagaries of weather phenomena also affect agriculture by interfering with routine agricultural operations and plant-protection measures. Further, influence of weather on crop growth and yield depends on crop growth stage. Crops are often influenced significantly by a few weather factors for their growth and development. For instance, during rainy season (kharif) when the temperatures are equable it is the quantum and distribution of rainfall that assumes paramount importance. Similarly in irrigated winter season (rabi) crops, temperature regime in the reproductive phase becomes critical.

In India, extensive investments and efforts have been made to achieve high annual growth rate in agricultural production; and occurrence of an abnormal monsoon resulting in inadequate soil moisture conditions during growing season can lower the agricultural production, significantly. The modification of weather, except on a limited scale, is yet on the realm of experimentation. Nevertheless, it is possible to optimize crop production by adjusting cropping patterns and appropriate agronomic practices to suit the climate of a locality.

Weather assumes significance in nearly every phase of agricultural activity from preparatory tillage to harvesting and storage. Weather affects selection of crop varieties, time of sowing, transplanting, scheduling of irrigation, timing of fertilizer application, using of pesticide etc. Climatological information can lead to better choice in areas, such as irrigation design, irrigation needs, groundwater extraction, crop type, cropping patterns and plans for mitigating natural disasters like droughts, cyclones, floods etc. Prediction of weather in advance from 1 day to 7 days would be useful in selecting timing of agricultural operations, scheduling of sowing and harvesting, scheduling of irrigation and frost prevention. Meteorological parameters have a pronounced impact on growth and intensity of attacks by pests, insects and crop diseases. Adverse weather warnings for the same would be useful to farmers for estimating the nature of these impending attacks based on the current conditions and past experience, so that they can take suitable remedial action and reduce monetary losses. The climatic factors and an understanding of the complex processes of interactions between climate and biological processes of crops are essential to a scientific approach to farming, based on planned cropping patterns and improved land- and water-management practices. The main challenge in Indian agriculture is to produce more food from less land with shrinking resources.

INDIAN AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION

Agriculture continues to be the mainstay of the Indian economy. Indian agriculture contributes to 25% of the national Gross Domestic Product. As per Census of India

2001, India’s total population was 1,028.6 million and the percentage of decadal growth of population during 1991-2001 was 21.34%. Thus, the main challenge is to produce enough food for increasing population. Though the foodgrains production in the recent years has crossed 200 million tonnes, India has to produce an additional 5-6 million tonnes of foodgrains annually in the next decade to meet the requirements of an estimated population of nearly 1,230 million people by 2010 ap. Indian agriculture has undergone a rapid change since the mid-sixties owing to onset of Green Revolution, including introduction of new high-yielding varieties of crops and new non- conventional crops, adoption of new technologies and new methods of cultivation.

There was very little change in the area under foodgrains. It was 120-131 million ha during 1967-68 to 2003-04, except in 1972-73 and 2002-03, and between 115 and120 million ha during 1964-65 to 1966-67, 1972-73 and in 2002-03. The highest area of 131.2 million ha under foodgrains in India was recorded in 1983-84.The foodgrains production in India was 89.4 million tonnes in 1964-65. It crossed 100 million tonnes in1970-71; 150 million tonnes in1983—84. The highest production and productivity so far were 212.9 million tonnes and 1,734 kg/ha recorded in 2001-2002 when the coverage was 122.8 million ha. The mean annual growth rates as indicated by the regression coefficients for various decades is given in Table 2.1.

The regression coefficients for area indicate small positive values in the first 2 decades and small negative values in the last 2 decades. Since the area under foodgrains is decreasing, further increases in foodgrains production of India in future have to come only through productivity increases. The production and productivity indicate positive growth rates in all the decades. The rates were the highest in the third decade.

During 1964-65 to 1987-88, the area under oilseeds ranged only from 15 to 20 million ha, production from 6 to 13 million tonnes and productivity from 400 to 684 kg/ha, thereby indicating only small increases in growth rates in this period. The year 1988-89 was a turning point when area under oilseeds in India jumped to 21.9 million ha, producing 18.03 million tonnes with a productivity of 824 kg/ha. Thereafter, there has been an increasing trend. The peak production of oilseeds in India of 24.75 million tonnes reached in 1998-99 with corresponding coverage and productivity being 26.23 million ha and 944 kg/ha. However, this steady increase could not be sustained after 1998-99. High growth rates for area, production and productivity of oilseeds were noticed from 1984-85 to 1993-94 (Table 2.1). Now its production has crossed 25 million tonnes.

Data were available during preparation of earlier edition only up to the year 2003—

WEATHER AND AGRICULTURE

04. Hence the above trend analysis of total food grain production in India was done using data up to 2003-04 only. But now the data from 2004-05 to 2007-08 are also available. Accordingly the decadal means of area, production and productivity of different individual crops have been computed for the latest 30 years period available (viz. 1978-79 to2007-08) and are presented in Table 2.2(a).

During the latest three decades, the mean decadal area under rice has increased by 3.4 million ha and wheat by 3.8 million ha, whereas area under coarse cereals has decreased from 40.5 million ha to 22.3 million ha, viz. by 18.2 million ha. The area under pulses has been stagnant in the range 22—23 million ha. The area under oilseeds has increased from 18.4 million ha to 25 million ha during the second and third decade. The quantum of increases from first to third decade of the study period with respect to production and productivity are as follows.

Substantial increase in production and productivity is seen mainly for rice and wheat. Though there is improvement in productivity, in view of decerase in coverage in respect of coarse cereals, production has not improved much. Improvement in production and productivity in respect of pulses is poor.

In view of year to year variability, the recent values of coverage, production and productivity of different crops were estimated by working out means for the latest five-year period ending 2007-08 and are presented in Table 2.2(b).

Thus, out of 122.7 million ha under foodgrains in India, 70.3 million ha are under wheat and rice and 52.4 million ha is under the remaining 2 crop groups. They produce 163.4 and 50.1 million tonnes of foodgrains respectively. The highest production is seen in respect of rice, followed by wheat. However, the wheat has the highest productivity value.

In order to understand the year to year growth during the recent 40 years in different crops, regression equations were computed for each of the periods 1968-69 to 1987- 88 and 1988-89 to 2007-08 in respect of A (area in million ha), P (production in million tonnes) and Y (productivity in kg/ha) and time(t) These equations are:

It is seen that that the highest growth rates in production and productivity are in respect of wheat followed by rice. Large decreases in coverage of coarse cereals and stagnancy in all the three parameters for pulses are seen clearly. Growth rates of production and productivity have slightly decreased in the second period for rice and wheat.

As per global ranking, the coverage of rice, wheat and pulses as on 2001-02 (A high production year) was the highest for the respective crop for any country in the world. However, India’s productivity of the foodgrain Crops was very much behind the global ranking of the productivity of the respective crops as indicated in Table 2.3.

WEATHER AND AGRICULTURE

They were also behind the global average productivity values for all crops although it was nearly same in wheat. The average productivity of coarse cereals and oilseeds in India was less than half of the global average.

DECLINE IN FOODGRAINS PRODUCTION IN INDIA

The most steep decline in foodgrains production of 38.66 million tonnes occurred in 2002-03, followed by 22.20 million tones in 1979-80. There are 7 years with declines in the range of 10—20 million tonnes. The least decline of 3 to 5 million tonnes occurred during 1971-72, 1974-75 and 1982-83. Another interesting feature noticed is that till 1987-88, declines were much more during kharif season as compared to rabi season, but from 1995—96 onwards both the cropping seasons indicated decreases. As a matter of fact, in the earlier period, in respect of a few drought years, rabi production increased and compensated to some extent the decrease in kharif season, probably owing to government initiatives. In 3 years with net decline of less than 5 million tonnes, declines in foodgrains production during kharifranged from 5.9 to 9.5 million tonnes (Table 2.5).

Though the gross decline in foodgrains production was more than 5 million tonnes in these years, on account of increase of the production in rabi season; the net decline in years when rabi foodgrains production increased after decline in kharif foodgrains production from the respective previous year was less. The ranges of decline in rabi foodgrains production are given in Table 2.6. The production data of rabi foodgrains separately were available only from 1967-68 and so the data for seasonal declines have

2.6 Range of decline in rabi foodgrains production in drought years 1964-65 to 2007-08

been given from the drought years of 1971-72 onwards. Out of 13 years of decline in rabi foodgrains production, 5 years were from 1991-92 to 2003-04 (Table 2.6).

Decline in production of individual crops in drought years during 1964-65 to 2003-04

Data indicate that steep decline is more frequent in rice, followed by coarse cereals, and declines in wheat production are becoming more common in recent years. In 63% of drought years, the decline in pulses was only 1-3 million tonnes.

The decade-wise mean declines in production of total foodgrains and individual crop groups in million tonnes per drought year are given in Table 2.7. Thus, the decadal mean of the decline in foodgrains production due to drought years varied from 8.0 million tonnes in the third decade to 17.5 million tonnes per drought year in the last decade. Considering all the 16 drought years in the whole period, the shares in the gross decline in foodgrains were 27% and 47% for coarse cereals and rice, respectively, 15% in pulses, and increase of 11% in wheat. Since the quantum of actual production of rice is higher than coarse cereals and pulses from the beginning of the study period, and the same has further increased considerably in the latter years, the actual reduction in production of rice during drought years was though high in numerical terms; the reduction expressed as percentage of actual production of rice in those particular years would be small. The same applies to wheat also.

INC in wheat represents increase (and not decline) in wheat production

The mean percentage reductions per drought year of the crops for the 4 decades under study expressed as the percentage of the concerned actual production of various crops is given in Table 2.8.

The percentage of rice production decline during a drought year decreased in the last 2 decades, Partly, it is due to large increase in total rice production. As per the means of the latest decade, the decline in drought year in respect of rice and wheat is 8 to 7% of their respective individual production and the same is 9 to 14% in respect

WEATHER AND AGRICULTURE

of other crops. Thus, drought years bring down the production in respect of all crops instead of maintaining their increasing growth rate. Since it occurs in irrigated crops also, a detailed analysis of irrigation status in India would be useful.

IRRIGATION

with favourable thermal and radiation regimes throughout year which makes it possible to grow several crops on the same plot of land in a year, provided water is not the limiting factor. Periods of maximum solar radiations in India coincide with minimum or no rainfall that calls for investment in irrigation, so that crops with very high yield potential can be grown during these periods. This type of multiple cropping would be extremely useful to increase the agricultural production of India. India has made considerable progress in the provision of irrigation. Net irrigated area in India during 1964-65 was 26.6 million ha. It rose to 40.5 million ha in 1981-82, 49.9 million ha in1991—92 and 57.2 million ha in 1999-2000.The growth rate as revealed by the regression line fitted for 1964-65 to1999—2000 is 0.9 million ha/year. Gross irrigated area in India was 30.7 million ha in 1964-65. It rose to 51.4 million ha in 1981-82, 65.7 million ha in 1991-92 and 76.3 million ha in 1999-2000. Thus, areas irrigated more than once have risen from 15% in 1964-65 to 27% in 1981-82, 32% in 1991-92 and 33% in 1999-2000.The growth rate of gross irrigated area in India as revealed by the regression coefficient is 1.33 million ha/ year which is more than that of net irrigated area indicating thereby that areas irrigated more than once had increased over the study period. The predominant irrigation systems are canals, wells and tube-wells. During the study period, while areas under irrigation by wells had increased, though not in a big way as in the case of tube-wells, the areas under tank irrigation had decreased.

During 1964-65, irrigation by canal was available in 11.2 million ha and the same has reached 15.9 million ha in 1981-82 and 17.8 million ha in 1999-2000 (1.59 times of initial value). However, the increase in irrigation by tube-wells is spectacular. From an initial value of 1.1 million ha in 1964-65, the same had increased to10.3 million ha in 1981-82 and to 21.0 million ha in 1999-2000 (19.1 times of the initial value). The net irrigated area by tube-wells had doubled during 1981-82 to 1999-2000.This large increase in tube-well irrigation necessitated provision of electricity or diesel fuel for operation of irrigation pumps. With the existing shortage of electric power in many states in India, often there are power cuts in rural areas affecting operation of tube- wells. Further, during drought years, availability of hydropower goes down and there is considerable energy shortage. Hence state and central governments have to accord high priority to the farm sector for electrical power. Remedial measures to overcome these difficulties have to be carefully planned. However, one positive aspect of tube-

well irrigation is that it is easier for the farmers to schedule irrigation scientifically with that system.

As on 1999-2000, 87% of wheat crop, 54% of rice crop, 8% of coarse cereals other than maize (Zea mays) (which has a value of 23%) and 16% of pulses were irrigated. And, bulk of coarse cereals and pulses and nearly half the area under rice were unirrigated.

Improvement in Productivity of Irrigated Crops

Foodgrains production in the country was 203.6 million tonnes in 1998-99. Out of 142 million ha of the total cultivated land, the area under foodgrains during that year was 125.2 million ha in the country. Thus, productivity of total foodgrains works out to be 1,626 kg/ha. The total irrigated area during 1998-99 was 57.1 million ha, out of which the irrigated area under foodgrains was 53.6 million ha. During that year, irrigated areas contributed 55% of the total foodgrain production, whereas the rainfed areas of 71.6 million ha under the coverage of foodgrains accounted for only 45% of the output. Thus the productivity of foodgrains in irrigated and unirrigated areas were 2,090 kg/ ha and 1,279 kg/ha respectively. The productivity under both the conditions was lower than that of the international standard. Going by past trends, the average spread of irrigation is around 9 million ha every decade. Extrapolating this trend it may be estimated that another 18 million ha additional area is likely to be brought under irrigation in the next 20 years. This will still leave 67 million ha of the cultivated area in India (nearly 50%) under rainfed conditions. Thus, productivity of irrigated areas should be increased at a higher rate than the present level so that the desired overall growth rates in the agricultural production can be maintained, as the growth rates of the predominantly rainfed crop groups like coarse cereals, pulses and oilseeds are comparatively low. The improvement in productivity of irrigated lands can be achieved by considerably improving the irrigation efficiency by irrigation scheduling and minimizing delivery losses etc.

Scheduling of irrigation

Irrigation scheduling is the decision of when and how much water to apply to a crop field. Its purpose is to maximize irrigation efficiency by applying the exact amount of water needed to replenish the soil moisture to the desired level. It saves water and energy. It enables the farmer to schedule water rotation among various fields to minimize crop water stress and maximize yields. It reduces the farmer’s cost on water and labour through less irrigation, thereby making maximum use of soil-moisture storage. It lowers fertilizer costs by holding surface run-off and deep percolation (leaching) to a minimum. It increases net returns by increasing crop yields and crop quality, and minimizes waterlogging problems. It also assists in controlling root zone salinity problems through controlled leaching.

Crop-water use, consumptive use and evapotranspiration (ET) are the terms that are used interchangeably to describe the water consumed by a crop. Water requirements of crops depend mainly on environmental conditions. Different crops have different water-use requirements under the same weather conditions. The water requirements vary with the phonological stages of the crop also. Hence the crop coefficients appropriate to the specific crops are used along with the values of reference

WEATHER AND AGRICULTURE

evapotranspiration for computing the consumptive use at different growth stages of the crop by water-balance approach. Crops will transpire water at the maximum rate when the soil water is at field capacity. When soil moisture decreases, crops have to exert higher forces (energy) to extract water from the soil. Usually, the transpiration rate does not decrease significantly until the soil moisture falls below 50% of field capacity. Knowing seasonal crop-water requirements is crucial for crop planning.

Reference evapotranspiration is generally computed by Penman’s method or pan evaporation method. A few empirical methods like Blaney-Criddle method and Hargreaves method are also available. In pan evaporation method, reference evapo- transpiration ET, is related to the evaporation by US class A open pan evaporimeter (E ,,n) by the following equation:

where E,,,, is the measured values of evaporation by US class A open pan evaporimeter and K, is pan coefficient.

Based on lysimetric studies, pan coefficients have been determined for different crops by Agrimet Division of India Meteorological Department, research centres of ICAR Co-ordinated Project on Agrometeorology, ICAR Institutes, and SAUs. All these findings should be put to operational use in fields:

The evapotranspiration (ETc in mm) of a crop under irrigation is obtained by the following equation:

where ET, is the reference evapotranspiration and K, is the crop coefficient.

The crop coefficient varies according to crop characteristics, dates of planting, stage of growth and climatic conditions. Differences in crop coefficients occur due to differences in crop height, crop roughness, albedos and soil and canopy cover. The same crop planted in different seasons can have different growth periods and different crop coefficients in the growth period, since the rate of growth is different. Accordingly, separate crop coefficients are generally assumed for the following 4 stages of crop growth. Detailed procedures for computing these coefficients are listed in FAO Irrigation and Drainage Paper—24 on crop-water requirements.

Initial stage: Germination period and early growth of the crop when the soil cover by the crop is less than 10%.

Crop development stage: The end of initial stage till the soil cover by the crop is about 70-80%.

Mid-season stage: From the end of the crop-development stage to the starting of maturing, which is indicated by discolouring of leaves or falling off of leaves. For most crops this may extend well past the flowering stage.

Late-season stage: From the end of mid-season stage to the full maturity or harvesting.

If farmer’s goal is to maximize yield then soil-moisture content is the irrigation criterion. He or she should try to keep the soil-moisture content above the critical level. If soil moisture falls below this level, the yield may be lower than the maximum potential yield. Thus, irrigation is applied whenever the soil-water content level reaches the critical level. How much water to apply depends on the irrigator’s strategy. For

example, the irrigator can replenish the soil moisture to field capacity or apply less. If no rain is expected and the irrigator wishes to stretch the time between irrigations, it is advantageous to refill the soil profile to field capacity. If rain is expected, it may be wise not to fill the soil profile to field capacity, but leave some room for rain. If the irrigator’s goal is to maximize net return, an economic irrigation criterion is needed, viz. net return. This is the income from the crop less the expenses associated with irrigation. The importance of irrigation scheduling by water-balance approach is that it enables the irrigator to apply the exact amount of water to achieve the goal. This increases irrigation efficiency. Also, uniform water distribution across the field is important to derive the maximum benefits from irrigation scheduling and management. Accurate water application prevents over-irrigation or under-irrigation. Over-irrigation wastes water, energy and labour; leaches expensive nutrients below the root zone, out of reach of plants; and reduces soil aeration and crop yields. Under-irrigation stresses the plant and causes yield reduction.

In spite of the improvements made in agricultural technology and fairly good growth of area under irrigation, achievement of a uniformly high growth rate of foodgrain production still could not be achieved due to occurrences of irregular monsoon. Irregular monsoons whether responsible for too little or too much rains, as revealed by the inter-annual variability of monsoon rainfall in different meteorological sub-divisions of India and the intra-annual variability of rainfall within the country in a particular season, have large impacts in foodgrain production in India.

PHYSICAL FEATURES AND CLIMATE OF INDIA

India is a country that extends from south to north for about 3,200 km between the latitudes of 37°6’ N and 8°4’ N and from east to west for about 3,000 km between the longitudes 68°7’E and 97°25’E. The lofty Himalayas run along its entire length in the north from Jammu and Kashmir to Arunachal Pradesh. To the south of this barrier are the alluvial Northern plains where the river systems of Indus, Ganges and Brahmaputra flow. Other macro-physiographic regions are the Peninsular Plateau located between Eastern Ghats and Western Ghats, Western and Eastern Coastal Plains, the Central Highlands, and Northwestern Desert. Thus, India is a land of many climates and varieties of soils affording scope for much diversity in agriculture. The geographic location and physical features largely determine the climate of the country. The pattern of rainfall all over India reflects the climatic variations in different parts of the country. Climate varies from per-humid in northeast India to arid in Rajasthan. A belt of semi- arid climate to the east of the arid zone extends from the north to the south of India. It lies between the humid regions of the West Coast plains and Ghats and sub-humid to per-humid regions of the central and northeastern India. Within this semi-arid belt, there is a small region of arid climate in the peninsular India also. The annual rainfall of the semi-arid and arid belts is less than 1,000 mm. This belt is the dry farming tract where new crops to augment food production can be introduced.The pattern of normal annual and seasonal rainfalls in India is described in the next section.

Pattern of Normal Annual Rainfall over India

Extremely high rainfall exceeding 3,000 mm occurs over the Hilly regions in Northern Himalayas, hills in Asom, Sub-Himalayan West Bengal and the windward side of the

WEATHER AND AGRICULTURE

Western Ghat regions of the peninsular India. These are the source regions for many of the major river systems in the country. Annual rainfall is in the range of 2,000- 3,000 mm in the plains of Asom and other adjoining northeastern states, northern parts of West Bengal and in western coastal plains in the peninsular India extending from Maharashtra to Kerala. Rainfall is in the range of 1,000—2,000 mm in East Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Gangetic West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Vidarbha, Jharkhand and a few coastal areas in Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, and the rest of the Himalayan regions in Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Jammu and Kashmir. Annual rainfall ranging from 500 mm to 750 mm occurs in the interior Deccan plateau stretching from Marathwada region of Maharashtra to south interior Karnataka and in Punjab, Haryana, and eastern Rajasthan and adjoining west Uttar Pradesh and Gujarat region and a few pockets in central and southeastern Tamil Nadu. The strip from Punjab to Kanyakumari in Tamil Nadu located between these 2 rainfall zones receives annual rainfall ranging from 750 to 1,000 mm.The least rainfall range of less than 500 mm occurs in western Rajasthan, Saurashtra and Kutch and Ladakh region of Jammu and Kashmir. These regions constitute the main arid zones of India.

A large part of the country receives, on an average, rainfall less than 1,000 mm per annum. The normal annual rainfall over the plains of India, based on the data of 2,800 stations for the period 1901-1970, is 1,170 mm. Such a normal rainfall is the highest anywhere in the world for a country of the size of India, viz. 3.28 million square kilometres. The irrigation in the semi-arid or arid belt in India is not sufficient and so the water balance is precarious. The agricultural potential of these dry farming tracts can be increased by adopting suitable package of practices aimed at the optimum utilization of available moisture potential through improved soil and water management.

Annual Rainfall Variability in India

The actual rainfall in any year in meteorological sub-divisions may differ widely from the normal, as the quantum of precipitation depends on the nature and the intensity of synoptic weather systems. A quantitative measure of inter-annual variability of annual rainfall is given by the coefficient of variation of annual rainfall (CV values), which is the ratio of standard deviation of annual rainfall to normal annual rainfall expressed in percentage. Isopleth map of CV values over India indicates that CV values are large exactly in the areas where annual normal rainfall is the least. For instance CV values exceeding 40% occur in the arid regions of west Rajasthan, Saurashtra and Kutch, Ladakh and southern parts of Punjab and Haryana. Thus, areas with low or scanty rainfall are generally the areas of high variability in rainfall also. In parts of Saurashtra and Kutch, the coefficient of variation is 40— 50%, whereas in western Rajasthan, it can be as high as 60-80% in some locations. The years of deficient rainfall and the years of excessive rainfall occur with no recognizable periodicity. Further, it is not unusual that, in some years, some parts of the country are in the grip of drought, while floods paradoxically ravage some others. The semi-arid region lying adjacent to arid regions and covering central Punjab, Haryana, western Uttar Pradesh, East Rajasthan, West Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat region as well as some very dry areas of interior Maharashtra, interior Karnataka, Rayalaseema and Tamil Nadu have CV values ranging from 30 to 40%.The humid

to per-humid regions of northeast India and Plains and Ghats of west coast have the least CV values of 20% or less.The remaining Deccan Plateau and north Indian regions have CV values of 20-30%.

Seasonal Rainfall Distribution of India

The percentage contribution values of south-west monsoon rainfall in different sub- divisions of India as per normal seasonal rainfall values published in seasonal rainfall reports of India Meteorological Department (IMD) for the year 2001 are in Table 2.9.

>90% East Rajasthan, West Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat region, Saurashtra, Kutch and Konkan

80-90% Jharkhand, Bihar, East Uttar Pradesh, West Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, West Rajasthan, East Madhya Pradesh, Vidarbha, Madhya Maharashtra, Marathwada, Telangana and Coastal Karnataka

70-80% Sub Himalayan and Gangetic West Bengal, Orissa, Uttarakhand and Punjab

60-70% Arunachal Pradesh, Asom, NMMT, Himachal Pradesh, North Interior Karnataka, South Interior Karnataka, Kerala and Lakshadweep

50-60% Andaman and Nicobar islands, Coastal Andhra Pradesh and Rayalaseema < 50% Tamil Nadu, Jammu and Kashmir

With the exception of Jammu and Kashmir, Bay islands, Coastal Andhra Pradesh, Rayalaseema and Tamil Nadu, 60-95% of the annual rainfall over various sub-divisions of the country occurs during the southwest monsoon season. Even in these sub- divisions, the contribution of southwest monsoon rainfall to the annual rainfall exceeds 75% except in Asom, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram, Tripura (NMMT), Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Arabian sea islands and interior Karnataka. The success of agriculture in India, therefore, depends primarily on timely onset and receipt of proper amount and distribution of rains in the season.

In Tamil Nadu, northeast monsoon accounts for 48% of annual rainfall compared to 33% by southwest monsoon.

Some winter rainfall occurs in Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Punjab and Haryana. The contribution ranges from 7% in Haryana to 17% in Jammu and Kashmir.

The contribution of rainfall during hot weather period is maximum (29%) in Jammu and Kashmir.It is 20-25% in Asom and adjoining states and 10-20% in Tamil Nadu, interior Karnataka, Kerala, Rayalaseema, West Bengal, Himachal Pradesh, Andaman and Nicobar islands and Lakshadweep.

Apart from Tamil Nadu, contribution of northeast monsoon rainfall exceeds 20% in coastal Andhra Pradesh, Rayalaseema, south interior Karnataka, Andaman and Nicobar islands and Lakshadweep and it is 16% in Kerala.

Thus, southwest monsoon (also called summer monsoon) is the main rainy season in India except for the extreme south peninsula. Hence a detailed analysis of the same is being presented in subsequent sections.

WEATHER AND AGRICULTURE

Normal Dates of Onset and Withdrawal of Southwest Monsoon

Southwest monsoon establishes around 1st of June in extreme south of India (Kerala) and in the extreme east of India (Assam). Then it gradually advances from south to north in the peninsula and from east to west in the northern India. The establishment of the southwest monsoon in the entire

north in the peninsula and from east to of the southwest monsoon in the entire i country completes by the end of June in the whole country except in the extreme western part of Rajasthan where it also establishes by mid-July. By the Ist week of September, the dry cold air from the northern latitudes begins to push back the moist equatorial maritime air of southwest monsoon in the west Rajasthan. The withdrawal is spread over 2 months. By 15 October dry air prevails over the whol P OVEEMIG WHOL

f southwest Table 2.10 Occurrence of southwes monsoon over Kerala in standard weeks (1960-91)

Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh. The retreating southwest monsoon is called as northeast monsoon. After 15 November, northeast monsoon is confined only to Tamil Nadu and Kerala.The period October to December is taken as northeast monsoon season. But these normal dates represent only average conditions. There are a lot of year-to-year variations in the onset and withdrawal dates in different regions of India during the individual years. For example, the onset of southwest monsoon over Kerala during 1960-1991 in various standard weeks is given in Table 2.10.

Though the normal date of onset of monsoon over Kerala is 1 June, there are wide variations in the onset dates and early onsets have been more common. In most of the early onset cases, there has been stagnation of monsoon current along the West coast, more frequently in Gujarat. Such stagnations occur in northwest Madhya Pradesh and adjoining Rajasthan also. The stagnation of monsoon current along the West coast is generally associated with the late onset of monsoon over northeast India and northwest bay compared to Kerala by 4 days or more. Presence of anti-cyclones in the middle troposphere to the north of the leading edge of the monsoon current stagnates the monsoons over peninsular India.

Occurrence of Droughts during Southwest Monsoon

Irrigation facilities available in our country are limited and, therefore, when droughts occur, they cause partial or complete crop failure. If failures occur in consecutive years, it becomes a national calamity, putting great strain on the economy of the country. The rainfed kharif crops raised during southwest monsoon season are exposed to slight to severe water stresses in different phenological phases of growing season, depending on dates of onset and withdrawal of the monsoon and deficient rainfall spells associated with ‘Breaks’ in monsoon.

The rabi crops grown without irrigation also depend on soil moisture accumulated during the preceding monsoon season since winter rainfall is meagre in different regions of India and its distribution is erratic.

Drought is a normal recurrent feature of climate. It occurs virtually in all climatic zones. Drought originates from a deficiency of precipitation over an extended period

of time. Conceptual definition of drought may be stated as that it is a protracted period of deficient precipitation, resulting in extensive damage to crops and loss of yields. Operational definitions have to specify the beginning, the end and the degree of severity of drought. Often to specify the beginning of drought, the departure from the average of precipitation or some other climatic variable over some time period is taken. Agricultural drought occurs when plant growth gets seriously affected on account of prolonged shortage of moisture in soil.

Hydrological drought occurs with marked depletion of surface water and consequent drying up of reservoirs, lakes, streams, rivers, and cessation of spring flows and fall in groundwater levels.

In India, as per Irrigation Commission of Government of India as well as India Meteorological Department, drought years have been defined as those years for which annual rainfall is less than or equal to 75% of the normal. Based on long period data, ifsuch droughts occur in certain area on more than 20% of years, that area is designated as a drought-prone area, provided that area does not have provisions of adequate irrigation facilities. Assuming the above definition of drought, the meteorological sub-divisions in India in which drought had occurred during the southwest monsoon of each of the years during 1901-2002 have been determined. The percentage numbers of individual Meteorological Sub-divisions of India suffering from drought during southwest monsoon (viz. seasonal rainfall being 75% of normal or less) in each of the years during 1901—2002 have been computed. These are computed using values of rainfall deficiency published in the IMD monsoon reports of the respective years. It is obvious that in those years when 20% or more of the sub-divisions of India suffer from drought, there would be significant decline in the agricultural production of the country. Such cases in each of the 30 years period of 1901-1990 have been tabulated, and the same is presented below.

Years with 20% or more of sub-divisions having drought

1901-1930 : 1901, 1904, 1905, 1907, 1911, 1913, 1915, 1918, 1920, 1928 10 years 1931-1960 : 1939, 1941, 1951, 1952 4 years

1961-1990 : 1965, 1966, 1968, 1972, 1974, 1979, 1982, 1985, 1986, 1987 10 years The frequency of occurrence of drought years in different sub-divisions of India has been more during 1901-1930 and 1961-1990 as compared to mid-period of 193 1— 1960. For 1991-2002, though deficiency of mean rainfall of India has been reported in official monsoon forecasts only for 1 year, viz. 2002, there were 2 years, viz. 1991 and 2002, with 20% or more of Sub-divisions having rainfall deficiency. The value for 2000 was 17% of Sub-divisions.

For drought monitoring and assessment of drought hazards, Decile approach is also used. For instance, Australian Drought Watch System uses Decile method for providing government assistance to farmers in droughts, and stipulates that the low rainfall criterion for specification of drought can be defined as that the same cannot occur more than often on 20% of occasions (80% probability level). This critical Decile value is estimated from the frequency distribution of rainfall in the region concerned. For this purpose, it may be better to fit a theoretical Gamma distribution to the observed frequencies.

Drought in general can be classified into permanent, seasonal, contingent and invisible droughts.

WEATHER AND AGRICULTURE

Permanent drought that is characteristic of the driest climate where sparse vegetation growing is adapted to drought and agriculture is possible only by irrigation during the entire crop season. These areas are extremely arid.

Seasonal drought is found in climatic regions that have well-defined rainy and dry seasons. The natural vegetation is made up of plants that produce seeds during the rainy season and die, and of those plants that remain alive throughout the year but become dormant in dry season. Most of the arid and semi-arid zones fall in this category. The planting dates and duration of crop varieties in these regions should be so adjusted that their growing season should fall within the rainy season, followed by the period having residual moisture storage. Contingent drought that is dependent on the irregularity of rainfall and so is not regular to occur in any definite season. Invisible drought that can occur even when there is frequent rainfall in an area. When rains do not supply enough water to counteract the water loss by evapotranspiration, a borderline water deficiency in soil occurs, resulting in less than optimum crop yields. This occurs usually in humid zone.

arid and semi-arid zones, the specification of drought cannot be divorced from land utilization. Rainfall too meagre to produce crops may be adequate for pasture. An amount of rain that would give normal growth of indigenous pasture in some areas may prove inadequate in respect of other areas. Thus, climatic criteria for drought may vary with the type of crop growth, pasture species growing and soil type of the locality. Hence in the monitoring of droughts in pasture land, concepts of initial effective rainfall necessary to initiate plant growth following drought and an effective carry- over rainfall to maintain growth and estimation of initiation and cessation of growth periods by water balance models during individual years are required. Such analysis would indicate duration of non-growth or drought periods within the growing season. Similar principles hold good in crop lands also. Concept of sowing rains for various crops in different soil types and soil depths and water-balance approach for determination of commencement and cessation of crop-growing season and monitoring of the occurrence of intermediary drought periods and determination of their durations and intensities are important. In this connection, moisture adequacy index (MAI) which is the ratio of actual to potential evapotranspiration (%) computed for short periods like weeks or 5 days in crop-growing season can be utilized.The weeks with MAI of less than 25% are taken as severe drought weeks and the weeks with MAI in the range of 25—49.9% are considered as moderate drought weeks. The weeks with MAI of 50% or more are taken as crop-growing season. If MAI becomes 75% or more in some weeks during the growing season, those weeks are taken as humid period with good moisture status.

An index widely used for classification of droughts is Palmer’s drought index, formulated by Palmer of USA in 1965. This index utilizes 2-layer approach in carrying out water balance and computes anomaly of rainfall from the CAFEC values. (The values of particular parameter that would have been climatically appropriate for the condition of the time and place being examined.) The CAFEC precipitation for the period concerned represents the amount of rainfall required to maintain normal evapotranspiration, run-off and soil-moisture storage taking into account the antecedent moisture conditions. The method also uses many parameters such as potential recharge, potential loss, potential run-off and coefficients of evapotranspiration, recharge, run-

off and depletion etc. Empirical weighing factors for representing the climatic type of the region and procedure for computation of drought spell indices for consecutive months have also been provided in the methodology. Studies conducted by the IMD scientists on drought spells that occurred in different meteorological sub-divisions of India using monthly Palmer’s indices indicated that the frequency and duration of drought months were over-estimated. The computations showed that, on an average, 20-25% of the days in each month of kharif turned out to be drought period over most of the sub-divisions in the country.

Another aspect of great interest in respect of drought is whether there is any periodicity in its occurrence. The power-spectrum analysis of rainfall series and that of Palmer drought index series by IMD scientists showed some relation to quasi- biennial and the 11-year sunspot cycles in some areas. The amplitudes of the cycles were, however, so small that they were not statistically significant. The probabilities of rainfall occurrences in different parts of India can, however, be used to estimate the risk of poor rainfall and attendant drought.

Subsequently in 1968, Palmer developed an agricultural drought index based on successive weekly values of the computed abnormal evapotranspiration deficits. Such indices were presented in Weekly Weather and Crop Bulletin of USA.

India Meteorological Department uses the Aridity Index given as (PE-AE)/PE as an index to assess the fortnightly drought situation over India. Obviously it is equal to (1- MAD). The water deficiency or drought over a station is estimated on the basis of the difference between actual and normal values of aridity index for the period concerned which is called the anomaly of the aridity index. The IMD issues fortnightly drought bulletins based on this approach. The criteria for specifying drought severity level based on aridity anomalies are given below.

The National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA) has developed a National Agricultural Drought Assessment and Monitoring System (NADAMS) based on remote sensing method. Vegetation is a useful and important parameter to detect agricultural drought in a region.

Vegetation strongly absorbs visible light. Higher the greenness of vegetation more is the absorption in the red wavelength of visible radiation (VIS) received from the sun. However, the incoming solar radiations in

of green leaves in the above spectral bands helps in monitoring of the status of vegetation

WEATHER AND AGRICULTURE

by using the following spectral vegetation index (NDVI).

NDVI = (NIR-VIS)/NIR + VIS

In operational methodology, daily advanced very high resolution radiometer (AVHRR) data of the satellite is used. The AVHRR data are corrected for path geometry (earth rotation, earth curvature, scan angle and North-South orientation) and converted into percentage albedo using pre-launch calibration coefficients. The NDVI is related to leaf-area index and carbon assimilation of vegetation. The NRSA utilizes NDVI anomaly values to determine the drought-severity level and has established the conventions given in Table 2.11 for specifying drought-severity levels.

The periodic bi-weekly drought bulletins and detailed monthly reports at district level for many states of India are being issued by the NRSA.

Peculiarity of Indian Monsoon

The greatest seasonal change in global circulation is the development of monsoons. The word monsoon refers to wind systems that exhibit a pronounced seasonal reversal in direction. The best-known and most pronounced monsoon circulation in the globe is found in southern and southeastern Asia, and especially in India. During winter months, high pressure and subsiding dry air dominate the weather, accompanied by strong flow off the Asian continent. But during summer monsoon months, low pressure and convergence dominate the circulation of southern Asia with moist air from adjoining oceans flowing into the region The Subtropical High regions of Hadley cell are generally more marked in the oceans. But even in the land masses existing at high tropical zones, viz. at 20-30 degrees latitude, there exists large-scale sinking of mid- troposphere air that does not allow cloud formation, resulting in widespread desert conditions. In fact, the heart of tropical desert in both the hemispheres is contained in the Latitude belt of 20-30 degrees. Since these regions have stable and diverging air masses, conditions are unfavourable for the development of convectional showers, in spite of intense heat. Since these regions in the latitude belt 20-30 degrees are generally affected neither by the middle latitude fronts and cyclones nor by advancing lows from Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ), they form the main hot deserts of the world. Some of the well-known deserts are Sahara desert of North Africa, the interior desert of Australia, the deserts of Southwestern USA and Northwestern Mexico and the deserts of the Middle East and Thar Desert of India. But in the Indian subcontinent, the situation is entirely different. The belt 20-30 degrees latitude does not have arid climate throughout. There is a definite eastern boundary of the desert, which does not go beyond 76° E longitude. Apart from that, there is a striking contrast between the northeastern and northwestern parts of India in the latitude belt of 20°-30°N.

The Northeastern part of this belt happens to be world’s wettest region, while the Northwestern part is desert. This paradox is due to the existence of extensive monsoon system in India from June onwards. Due to Asiatic monsoon, large circulation changes take place and Inter Tropical Convergence Zone shifts to 30°N latitude and beyond in India and in eastern Asia during summer, whereas it lies in 3~10°N latitude in Pacific ocean and shifts only up to 18°N latitude in northern Africa. The large migration of ITCZ is accompanied by a significant change in pressure.

The strong high-pressure system and subsidence that have dominated winter flow is replaced by the low pressure and convergence during summer. The Himalayas as well as Tibetan plateau that are at the mid-troposphere level, play a significant role in this process.

These topographic barriers help in preventing extremely cold conditions prevailing in interior China from reaching northern India during winter. The sudden swing of westerly jet stream from south of the Himalayas to north of Tibetan plateau and subsequent onset of southwest monsoon in India are all brought about by the reversal of normal temperature and pressure pattern that occur due to the seasonal warming of Tibetan plateau. This reversal acts like a switch for the advancement of ITCZ to northern India by mid-June, together with rapid extension of equatorial westerlies and migration of Tropical easterlies (Bay monsoon) towards northern India. Accordingly, 2 cells of opposite circulation replace Hadley cell with common heat source near Tibetan plateau. Two jet streams are indicated in this model, one in the westerlies pole ward of northern cell and the other in the easterlies equator ward of southern cell. The easterly jet stream is closely related to the activity of the monsoon.

Another important element of the monsoon circulation is the Walker circulation invented by Gilbert Walker of India Meteorological Department. It is an eastwest circulation pattern in the tropics characterized by several cells of rising and sinking air connected by horizontal motions along more or less parallel lines of latitude. This involves a westward flow of surface air into the Western Pacific and a return easterly upper flow at higher levels in troposphere. The Trade winds move warm surface waters near the Equator westward, causing higher temperatures, increase in sea levels, lower surface pressure and large convectional precipitation in the Western Pacific region. When the trade winds weaken, an important phenomenon of El Nino develops. The warm water normally found in Western Pacific moves eastward and finally reaches Peru-Ecuador coasts of Pacific Ocean. Many studies have shown that the El Nino phenomenon and eastwest movement of higher sea surface temperatures have strong influence on Indian monsoon rainfall. This phenomenon is dealt with in details in the next section.

Nino and southern oscillation and its association with Indian monsoon

Ocean constitutes 71% of the earth’s surface. So, the role of upper ocean thermal anomalies in short-term climate variability is an important area of climatic research. In temperate latitudes, pronounced anomalies in upper ocean heat content and ocean- atmosphere heat exchange occur seasonally. But major anomalies in the basin-scale ocean circulations evolve more slowly, viz. over years and decades, But at the low latitude regions, the ocean dynamics are relatively fast and large-scale interactions between atmospheric and ocean circulations occur even on seasonal and inter-annual scales. El Nino/Southern oscillation is one such phenomenon.

The world’s most extensive region of warm ocean water [Sea Surface Temperature (SST) greater than 28°C] is located in the western equatorial Pacific-Indonesian region. The heavy rainfall and associated heating of the atmosphere over this huge ‘warm pool is the source of atmospheric heating. But the eastern equatorial Pacific is normally colder than the western part mainly due to the influence of Northeasterly Trade

WEATHER AND AGRICULTURE

winds, a cold ocean current flowing up the coast of Chile and the upwelling of the cold deep water off the coast of Peru. During a typical year under normal conditions, viz. in a Non El Nino year, the Trade winds converge near the equator and the flow creates a warm surface current that moves from east to west along the equator. This results in piling up of thick layer of warm surface water that produces higher sea levels (by about 40 cm) in the western Pacific. Sea surface temperatures of the western Pacific are about 8°C higher than eastern Pacific. But a strong cold Peruvian current, upwelling of cold water and lower sea levels characterize the eastern Pacific.

Periodically, a phenomenon called as Southern Oscillation that is a global scale seesaw in surface pressure with centres of action near Indonesia-North Australia in one side and Southeast Pacific region in the other side occurs, and when it occurs, the above-mentioned normal situation greatly changes. Pressure rises in the Indonesian region. As a consequence, the steady Trade winds diminish and may even change direction. This reversal creates a major change in the equatorial current system with warm water flowing eastward. This eastward shift of the warmest water marks the onset of El Nino that sets up changes in atmospheric circulation. This represents the warm phase of Southern Oscillation. Thus, El Nino is a recurrent event of anomalous warming of the eastern equatorial Pacific in which temperatures are significantly above normal. El Nino is named after a Peruvian Christmas festival where the warming of the waters off Peru is said to occur near the birthday of ‘The Boy’ (El Nino) or the Christ child. The meteorologists refer to the two phenomena of El Nino and Southern Oscillation that are atmospheric and oceanic parts of global system of climatic fluctuations as ENSO. The reverse phenomenon of the cooling of the eastern Pacific is called as La Nina (The Girl).

El Nino is a disruption of the ocean-atmosphere system in the tropical Pacific having important consequences for weather around the globe. Among these consequences are increased rainfalls across the southern tier of the USA and in Peru, which cause destructive flooding, and drought in the regions of West Pacific, sometimes associated with devastating bush fires in Australia. Observations of conditions in the tropical Pacific are considered essential for the prediction of short-term climate variations (a few months to | year) in the globe. To provide necessary data, the National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) of the USA operates a network of buoys that measure temperature, currents and winds in equatorial band. These buoys daily transmit data that are available to researchers and forecasters around the world in real time. The ENSO episodes usually begin early in the year and have nearly similar evolution over a period of 18-24 months. El Nino’s mature phase when the global anomalies become manifest, usually occurs by the end of first year or the early part of the second year. Though the effects of the ENSO are global, the most pronounced anomalies occur in the Indian Ocean-tropical Pacific sector. West Pacific-Indian ocean monsoon regions such as Australia, Indonesia, Philippines and India, experience drought during E] Nino years resulting in crop losses. The El Nino causes a massive flooding in the arid zone of Peru. Maize production has been found to be much higher in Argentina during E] Nino years as compared to other years. Inter-relations of ENSO variability and occurrence of widespread and persisting droughts in Sahel region of Africa have

Occurrence of El Nino and La Nina (1964-65 to 2007-08): their effects on Indian foodgrains production

El Nino and La Nina events are classified by a number of different criteria. Some classification systems use the strength and sign of the Southern Oscillation Index (SOI), while others use Sea Surface Temperature (SST) anomalies for a variety of Pacific regions. Still others use a combination of several criteria to gauge the type and strength of the event. Consequently there are different lists which are actively used. One of the widely used classifications of El Nino and La Nina years is by the NOAA of USA. The Climatic Diagnostics Centre (CDC) of NOAA advocates the determination of EI Nino and La Nina years by means of Southern Oscillation Index, whereas the Climatic Prediction Centre (CPC), National Weather Service of NOAA uses the sea surface temperature anomalies of the Nino 3.4 region (latitude 5° N to 5° S, longitude 120°-170°W) for determination of these years by specifying a threshold of + 0.5°C. A few consensus lists of El Nino and La Nina years are available in the literature.

The classification of 17 years when the total foodgrains production in India declined during 1964-65 to 2007-08 is given in Table 2.12. Thus, out of the 16 years (given below) in which the foodgrains production of India has declined, 9 years have been classified as El Nino years (marked in italic letters in the list A below), 2 weak El Nino years, and 5 years have been classified as weak La Nina years.

1965-66, 1972-73, 1982-83, 1986-87, 2004-05, 1966-67, 1976-77, 1971-72, 1974-75, 1987-88, 1991-92, 1997-98, 1979-80 1984-85, 1995-96, 2002-03 2000-01

List A: 1965-66, 1966-67, 1971-72, 1972-73, 1974-75, 1976-77, 1979- 80, 1982-83, 1984-85, 1986-87, 1987-88, 1991-92, 1995-96, 1997-98, 2000-01, 2002-03 and 2004-05

The year of 1966-67 is the year next to a strong El Nino year 1965-66 with mean Oceanic Nino Index (ONI) for the period from August 1965 to January 1966 varying from +1.4 to +1.6 and for the period from February 1966 to April 1966 varying from +0.8 to + 1.2. The ONI values from May 1966 to September 1966 were also positive varying from 0 to 0.5. Thus negative values of ONI did not set in till nearly the end of kharif season of 1966. A few studies conducted in India and abroad have shown general association between ENSO events and deficient southwest monsoon rainfall in the El Nino year or in the subsequent year. The monthly Southern Oscillation Index values of 1966 also remained negative till December 1966. Further, large declines in foodgrains production comparable to El Nino years occurred in 1966— 67 in respect of total foodgrains as well as for the entire crop groups in India. In view of these, the year 1966-67 has been taken as a weak El Nino year and the same year has been clubbed with El Nino years in the list A for calculation of averages.

Occurrence of El Nino and La Nina (1964-65 to 2007-08): their effects on Indian foodgrains production

El Nino and La Nina events are classified by a number of different criteria. Some classification systems use the strength and sign of the Southern Oscillation Index (SOI), while others use Sea Surface Temperature (SST) anomalies for a variety of Pacific regions. Still others use a combination of several criteria to gauge the type and strength of the event. Consequently there are different lists which are actively used. One of the widely used classifications of El Nino and La Nina years is by the NOAA of USA. The Climatic Diagnostics Centre (CDC) of NOAA advocates the determination of EI Nino and La Nina years by means of Southern Oscillation Index, whereas the Climatic Prediction Centre (CPC), National Weather Service of NOAA uses the sea surface temperature anomalies of the Nino 3.4 region (latitude 5° N to 5° S, longitude 120°-170°W) for determination of these years by specifying a threshold of + 0.5°C. A few consensus lists of E] Nino and La Nina years are available in the literature.

The classification of 17 years when the total foodgrains production in India declined during 1964-65 to 2007-08 is given in Table 2.12. Thus, out of the 16 years (given below) in which the foodgrains production of India has declined, 9 years have been classified as El Nino years (marked in italic letters in the list A below), 2 weak El Nino years, and 5 years have been classified as weak La Nina years.

1965-66, 1972-73, 1982-83, 1986-87, 2004-05, 1966-67, 1976-77, 1971-72, 1974-75, 1987-88, 1991-92, 1997-98, 1979-80 1984-85, 1995-96, 2002-03 2000-01

List A: 1965-66, 1966-67, 1971-72, 1972-73, 1974-75, 1976-77, 1979- 80, 1982-83, 1984-85, 1986-87, 1987-88, 1991-92, 1995-96, 1997-98, 2000-01, 2002-03 and 2004-05

The year of 1966-67 is the year next to a strong El Nino year 1965-66 with mean Oceanic Nino Index (ONI) for the period from August 1965 to January 1966 varying from +1.4 to +1.6 and for the period from February 1966 to April 1966 varying from +0.8 to + 1.2. The ONI values from May 1966 to September 1966 were also positive varying from 0 to 0.5. Thus negative values of ONI did not set in till nearly the end of kharif season of 1966. A few studies conducted in India and abroad have shown general association between ENSO events and deficient southwest monsoon rainfall in the El Nino year or in the subsequent year. The monthly Southern Oscillation Index values of 1966 also remained negative till December 1966. Further, large declines in foodgrains production comparable to El Nino years occurred in 1966— 67 in respect of total foodgrains as well as for the entire crop groups in India. In view of these, the year 1966-67 has been taken as a weak El Nino year and the same year has been clubbed with El Nino years in the list A for calculation of averages.

WEATHER AND AGRICULTURE

The percentage changes of production of total foodgrains and crop groups in India during El Nino years from their respective previous years during 1964-65 to 2003-04 are given in Table 2.13.

There were decreases in foodgrains production in all these El Nino years. Out of 12 El Nino years, decline in total foodgrains was between 11 and 19% per year in 5 years. The worst drought years were 1965-66, 1966-67, 1972-73, 1979 -80 and 2002-03.

The percentage changes of production of total food grains and crop groups in India in respect of 5 weak La Nina years in the above list from their respective previous year’s values are given in Table 2.14. The pattern for these years is similar to those of El Nino years but with much smaller decline values.

Information on percentage changes of production of total foodgrains and crop groups in India during La Nina years from their respective previous year during 1964—65 to 2003-04 is given in Table 2.15.

High production increases have occurred in the entire crop groups and total foodgrains during these La Nina years. The average changes pertaining to different categories of years are given in Table 2.16.

Thus, out of 17 years in which total foodgrains have declined during the period (1964-65 to 2007-08), the average declines in respect of total foodgrains in 11 El Nino years and 5 weak La Nina years are 10 and 5% per year respectively. There was a mean increase of 14% per year in respect of 10 La Nina years.

Monsoon Depressions

The activity of the southwest monsoon is not uniform in time and space during the whole season. The intensity and the distribution of rainfall are controlled by a series of tropical disturbances (lows, depression and cyclonic storms) which either originate near the head Bay of Bengal or arrive there from the China seas across Burma (Myanmar) and Bangladesh. These low pressure systems move in a west-northwesterly direction along the Gangetic valley and enter East Rajasthan. Thereafter, they would either dissipate or move in a northerly or northeasterly direction towards Uttarakhand and give heavy rains there before dissipation. Along and near tracks of these low- pressure systems abundant rainfall occurs, especially, areas south of the track receive heavy rainfall. In those years when these low-pressure systems are scarce, the rainfall will be confined to the mountain ranges of Asom and foothills of the Himalayas and Western Ghats, with the interior parts of the country not getting their usual share of rainfall. This will result in occurrences of droughts in these regions. Some of these lows originate in the interior land areas of India also and they produce rain over the central and northern parts of the country. There are also a few low-pressure systems that form in the Arabian Sea, travel in a northerly or northeasterly direction and give rainfall in the western parts of the country. A slow moving system gives comparatively

WEATHER AND AGRICULTURE

more rainfall due to stay of the same for a longer time in the areas concerned.

On an average 3 or 4 depressions form in a month during the season (June to September). Majority of the systems last

However, there are large year-to-year variations in number of these low-pressure systems and their durations. Maximum numbers of these days (>50% of total) occur in the area bounded by 20°-25° N latitude and 80°-90° E longitude, viz. in the region comprising East Madhya Pradesh, North Orissa, Jharkhand, South Bihar and Gangetic West Bengal.

Even when these depressions and lows are of normal frequency and intensity, their tracks determine the distribution of rainfall over northern and central India. When these low-pressure systems follow a northwesterly track across the plains of the Ganges, there will be floods in northern India and deficiency of rainfall in the peninsula. The reverse is true when they take a westerly track across the central India when the northern States are affected by droughts. The conditions in the states where the tracks of depressions terminate, viz. Gujarat and Rajasthan, tend to be erratic. When the systems reach these states they get abundant rainfall but in other cases they are subjected to prolonged droughts.

Thus, it can be said that the above-mentioned low-pressure systems occurring in the Southwest monsoon is an important factor that controls the distribution of rainfall over the whole of India. These in turn affect both irrigation and agriculture.

Breaks in Monsoon

During the active monsoon periods, there is an extension of stationary low-pressure area over Baluchistan and Afghanistan as a trough of low pressure extending along the Gangetic valley into West Bengal or occasionally into the North Bay of Bengal. This is called the monsoon trough. Occasionally, this monsoon trough shifts northwards to the foot of the Himalayas. Simultaneously, a few low-pressure waves move westwards across the southern peninsula. When this happens there is a sudden decrease of rainfall over most of the country and the rainfall is confined to the hills and the sub- montane districts of the eastern Himalayas and in the southern peninsula. This is called the break in monsoon. Owing to heavy rains in the catchments of the Brahmaputra river and its tributaries and the catchments of some of the rivers in north Bengal and Bihar, floods in these rivers are possible during these breaks in the monsoon periods. For the rest of the country it is a rainless period that may lead to disastrous consequences due to crop failures over a wide area. The northward shift of the monsoon trough could be related to changes in the large-scale circulations in the middle latitudes and to changes in the intensity of the equatorial trough. The latter may be due to inter- hemispherical or air to sea interactions over the Indian ocean or due to formation of tropical disturbances. The activity of the monsoon is brought to a halt for a week or

two almost all over the country, during the monsoon breaks. These can occur In any of the monsoon months but the mid-monsoon month of August is more susceptible for their occurrences than July. When they occur in the second fortnight of August, they are usually of longer duration. When a long break occurs during July at the beginning of the cropping season, its effect on the growing crops is quite harmful. A poor monsoon rainfall year is one in which there are prolonged breaks in July and August and less number of low-pressure systems which move along the monsoon trough.

Long Range Forecasts of Rainfall during Southwest Monsoon Season

Indian agriculture mainly depends on the monsoon rains. The farmers in India anxiously wait for the onset of the monsoon and often pray for a favourable distribution of rainfall during the monsoon season. As there are considerable variations from year to year in the advent of the monsoon over different sub-divisions of India, the predicting the dates of its onset and giving advance indications of the probable distribution of rainfall over various regions of the country are of great economic significance.

Since 1886, the India Meteorological Department has been issuing long range or seasonal forecasts for the Southwest monsoon rainfall during June—September. The method consists in making use of certain weather factors over different parts of the world that have significant relationship with the subsequent monsoon rainfall in India. Dr Blanford of the India Meteorological Department issued the first operational long- range forecast in 1886 based on the observed inverse relationship between Indian monsoon and the Himalayan snow cover and excessive winter in the Himalayan region, Sir Gilbert Walker, also of the India Meteorological Department, introduced in 1923 the objective technique of multiple regressions. During every year, the first seasonal forecast by the India Meteorological Department is issued in June for the rainfall from June to September, in respect of the Peninsula, comprising Maharashtra, Gujarat, Orissa, Madhya Pradesh, Telangana, Coastal Andhra Pradesh, North interior Karnataka and Coastal Karnataka and Northwest India (Jammu and Kashmir, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Delhi, Chandigarh and Rajasthan). The second forecast is issued for the latter half of the monsoon season (August-September) for each of the Divisions, the Peninsula and Northwest India. The third forecast issued in January is for the prediction of probable amount of rain and snow during January—March in northern India.

During early 1980s, models based on dynamic stochastic techniques were used for seasonal forecasting in India. Since the monsoon is a major atmospheric circulation over the globe, a dynamic approach by taking into consideration the global Tele connection factors is necessary. It is also essential to understand the role of the oceanic picking up of moisture and the underlying oceanic currents in order to enable long- term predictions being made with some degree of confidence. In view of the same, numerous studies on the subject have been and are being made in India and abroad. A number of monsoon experiments have been and are being conducted to find out the Tele connections and factors responsible for the large inter-annual variations in the summer monsoon rainfall. A few of the findings are given below.

Dr Blanford of the IMD found that excessive winter and spring snowfall in the Himalayas was an indicator of subsequent deficient Southwest monsoon rainfall in

WEATHER AND AGRICULTURE

India and so he used this factor in the forecast of monsoon rainfall. Studies of satellite- derived snow cover data over Eurasia and Southwest monsoon rainfall over India have shown that an inverse relationship exists between these 2 factors. The same may be due to the fact that persistent winter snow cover over Eurasia can delay and weaken the spring and summer heating of the land masses which is necessary for the large- scale monsoon flow. Further in such cases, during spring and summer seasons following winters with excessive snow, most of the solar energy is used for melting the snow and evaporating water from the wet soil. Similarly, there is a global-scale linkage between temperature and pressure values of the Northern Hemisphere and Indian Southwest monsoon rainfall. Much cooler than normal winter in Northern hemisphere may lead to occurrence of droughts during Southwest monsoon in India.

Further, as already stated in one of the earlier sections, a number of studies conducted in India and abroad have shown general association between ENSO events and deficient Southwest monsoon rainfall in the El Nino year or the subsequent year. These studies have also revealed that since sea surface temperature anomalies and Southern Oscillation index associated with El Nino usually occur before the Southwest monsoon, this association would be a useful forecasting tool.

It has been found that there is a significant association between the average positions of the ridge at 500 millibars over India during April and subsequent Southwest monsoon rainfall. If the ridge position is south of its normal position, Southwest monsoon rainfall would be deficient. Similarly, the thickriess of the layer of 300-100 millibars that is a measure of the upper troposphere temperature also has association with monsoon rainfall. If there were negative anomalies in this thickness value during pre-monsoon months, the ensuing Southwest monsoon rainfall would be deficient.

Based on such studies, the IMD adopted from 1989, a Power regression model with16 parameters (Table 2.18) for the long-range forecast of Southwest monsoon rainfall over all India. The predictors include global and regional atmosphere—land— ocean parameters, covering the antecedent period from December to May. This operational forecast of the IMD has 2 parts, viz. forecast as to whether monsoon rainfall will be excess or normal or deficient and the forecast of quantitative value ofmonsoon rainfall (June to September) over the country as a whole. The parametric model is used for preparing the forecast of the monsoon category and the Power regression model is used for predicting the quantitative monsoon rainfall. This Power regression model developed by using the relevant data pertaining to1958-—87 has a model error of 4%.

Subsequent studies have shown that 4 predictors, viz. 500 hpa Ridge position (April), Northern India Minimum Temperature (March), 10 hpa Zonal wind over Balboa (January) and Darwin 09 hours Pressure (Spring) have lost their significant relationship with Southwest monsoon rainfall of India. In view of the same, these 4 parameters of the serial nos. 2, 3, 5 and 13 in the Table 2.18 have been replaced by the following new 4 parameters in the Power regression model used by IMD for seasonal forecasting of Southwest monsoon rainfall over India. This revised model was effective from 1999.

(2) Darwin Pressure Tendency (April-January)

(3) South Indian Ocean Sea surface Temperature (February + March)

(5) Sea surface Temperature of the Arabian Sea (January + February)

(13) Europe Pressure Gradient (January)

Due to availability of more accurate and longer set of data of sea surface temperatures

Parameters

of the Indian ocean and Arabian sea, it has been possible to find out the new predictors of (3) and (5) which are significantly and positively correlated with Indian Southwest monsoon rainfall. Similarly, the parameter of (13) Europe Pressure-gradient measured as difference in pressure anomalies between a southern zone and northern zone in Europe indicates the strength of the Pole ward Pressure gradient and hence is significantly and positively correlated with Southwest monsoon rainfall. However, new predictor of (2) Darwin Pressure Tendency is inversely related to Indian Southwest monsoon rainfall. The IMD has been using this revised 16-parameter Power regression model for seasonal forecasting of Southwest monsoon rainfall.

Recently, India Meteorological Department (IMD) follows a two-stage forecast strategy for long-range forecasts of the Southwest monsoon rainfall over the country as a whole. The first long-range forecast for the Southwest monsoon season (June— September) rainfall is issued in April and the forecast update is issued in June.

During the last two years (2007 and 2008), IMD has been using the following statistical models for forecasting the Southwest monsoon rainfall (June—September) for the country as a whole:

(a) A 5-parameter statistical ensemble forecasting system requiring data up to March, for the first forecast in April.

(b) A 6-parameter statistical ensemble forecasting system requiring data up to May for the forecast update in June. Three of these 6-parameters are same as that used for April forecast.

Operational Statistical Forecast System

In the IMD’s Ensemble Statistical Forecasting system for April forecast, the 5 predictors, given on next page, are used. The model error of the April forecasting systems is £5%,

WEATHER AND AGRICULTURE

In addition to IMD experimental forecasts are prepared by the national institutes like Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology, Pune, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, Space Applications Centre, Ahmedabad, National Aerospace Laboratories (NAL), Bengaluru, Centre for Mathematical Modelling and Computer Simulation (CMMACS), Bengaluru and National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting (NCMRWEF),Noida. Operational/experimental forecasts are also prepared by international institutes like the National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP), USA, International Research Institute for Climate and Society (IRI), USA, Meteorological Office, UK, the European Center for Medium Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), UK , the Experimental Climate Prediction Center (ECPC), USA, and World Meteorological Organization (WMO)’s Lead Centre for Long Range Forecasting - Multi-Model Ensemble (LRFMME).

Thunderstorms and Hail

Thunderstorms occur at variable frequencies in different parts of India. Every location is vulnerable to thunder and lightning from time to time. Lightning occurs when the voltage gradient within a cloud or between clouds overcomes the electrical resistance of air. The result is large and powerful spark that partially equalizes the charge separation. Cloud-to-cloud lightning causes the sky to light up more or less uniformly. Cloud-to-surface lightning also occurs on rare occasions. This may result in blowing out electrical appliances in the buildings. It can start forest fires. The tremendous increase in temperature during a lightning stroke causes the air to expand explosively and produce the sound of thunder. Since the speed of sound is lower than that of light, thunder is heard with a time lag after the flash of lightning. Generally before and after the monsoon season, thunderstorms with associated showers of rain and hail are the predominant weather phenomena. When sufficient moisture is not present in the air, as over northwest India, only a dust storm may result. Thunderstorms, with associated squalls, are of short duration, but some are very violent and destructive like the Kalbaishakis of Bengal. Dust storms or andhis occur over northwest India. Some violent thunderstorms are accompanied with hail, especially in northern and central India and occasionally in the interior of peninsular India. The frequency of hailstorms is small in winter, but increases generally as the season advances to summer. During monsoon season, hailstorms are practically absent from the whole country.

Hail consists of ice pellets formed in concentric layers. It occurs only in Cumulonimbus clouds where updrafts can reach nearly 160 km/hr and where there is abundant supply of super cooled water. Initially an updraft carries water droplet above the freezing level to form the core of the hailstone. At some point the pellet falls from the updraft and collides with a film of liquid water. If the pellet is again lifted above

the freezing level by an updraft, the same freezes to form a second layer of ice. This sequence can repeat a number of times resulting in the formation of several ice layers consisting of alternating zones of clear and milky ice. This process continues till it falls as hail either due to a downdraft or due to it growing too heavy to remain suspended by thunderstorm’s updraft. The number of days with hail is about 6—7 per year over Himachal Pradesh and its neighbourhood, but it decreases to 1 in 2 years over the adjoining plains. Over Bengal, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh, hailstorms occur on an average once a year. Hailstorms are comparatively rare over the coastal tracts of the Peninsula. In Central India, especially in February and March, hailstorms occur on | or 2 occasions in the year, and pose a potential hazard to rabi crops. Protection against violent hailstorms is possible by adopting artificial hail suppression methods. It is difficult to forestall a hailstorm, since its occurrence is sporadic and confined to very limited areas in a thunderstorm. It is a highly localized phenomenon.

Cyclonic Storms

A cyclonic storm is an intense vortex or a whirl in the atmosphere with very strong winds circulating in an anti-clockwise direction in the Northern hemisphere and clockwise direction in Southern hemisphere. The tropical storm is called as a cyclone. Cyclones from the Ray of Bengal and the Arabian Sea ravage the Indian coasts generally during the pre-monsoon period from April to May and during the post-monsoon period from October to December. On an average 2-3 storms may be expected in a year. On the coast, many storms cause widespread damage to the standing crops due to high winds and the associated tidal waves, which are responsible for about 90% of the deaths in low-lying areas. With the aid of modern tools for detecting and tracking storms, such as the radar and meteorological satellites, the India Meteorological Department is now in a position to give advance warning of impending cyclones with sufficient accuracy. A chain of powerful cyclone-warning radars has been installed at many coastal stations like Visakhapatanam, Chennai, Kolkata, Paradeep, Kochi and Mumbai. Weather-satellite monitoring stations and cyclone-warning centres are operating at many centres of the IMD.

Western Disturbances

During November—May, cloudy weather and light rainfall in the plains and snowfall in the hills in the north occur in association with a series of disturbances that enter India through Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan and move eastwards across northern India and Asom. The average frequency of these western disturbances is 2 in November and May and 4 or 5 from December to April. These disturbances result in light rains that are beneficial to rabi crops. In winter months, the disturbances are also followed by cold waves over northern and central India. These cold waves sometimes are injurious to vegetable and fruit crops.

Temperature

The air temperature is a decisive factor in plant growth, especially in the subtropics. The growing season in these latitudes, where frost conditions set a limit, is defined on the basis of air temperature. In India, high temperatures are also of special importance,

WEATHER AND AGRICULTURE

as they may have damaging effects on crops during the period of water stress in the arid or semi-arid regions. Each crop is known to have its own optimum, maximum and minimum temperature conditions. Air temperatures bear a close relationship with incoming solar radiation and energy available for the growth of plants.

The maximum temperatures in the country are high in March, April and May over northern Deccan and central parts of India. Later in June, the highest values shift northward and northwestwards. In July and August, due to the setting in of Southwest monsoon in most parts of the country maximum temperatures are lower than that in summer. However, parts of Tamil Nadu still experience high maximum temperature.

Cold Waves and Frosts

A cold wave occurs in the form of pulses that bring about over nightfall of minimum temperature. A fall by 6°-8°C from normal represents cold wave condition and fall by more than 8°C is termed as severe cold wave condition.

The cold season begins over India by early-December. As already stated in an earlier section, during the wintermonths, under the influence of western disturbances, which are followed by cold dry northerly winds, thenight temperatures fall rapidly by 7°-8°C below thenormal and inregionsnorth ofthe Deccan Plateau and by about 5°C in peninsular parts of the country. The ground temperatures are usually much lower than air temperatures. So, under such cold wave conditions, the crops may be subject to sub-zero temperatures and damage due to chilling and ground frost whichis likely to take place. The frost hazard is the greatest in northern Punjab, being 10-20 days each in December, January and February. Southwards and eastwards of this area, frost occurrence decreases rapidly.

The temperature to which air must be cooled to become saturated is known as dew point. Frost forms when the dew point of the air is below freezing. Thus frost forms when water vapour changes directly from gas to solid stage without entering the liquid state. Very small ice crystals are deposited on surfaces. A frost hazard is produced when a cold air mass moves into the region or when sufficient radiation cooling takes place on a clear night. The former may inflict widespread damage to crops or orchards. Probably, the latter is comparatively easy to combat.

The regional and state forecasting offices of the India Meteorological Department, in order to enable the farmers to adopt timely protective measures, issue warnings for cold waves and frosts. Irrigation or spraying with water helps to mitigate frost damage in the fields. The use of heaters in orchards will help to raise the temperature by as much as 5°C. Valleys in which cold air stagnates are subject to frost to a greater extent, especially in the grape fields of Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra. While laying out orchards and tea gardens, such valleys should be avoided. Trees planted as shelterbelts or as shade trees protect the crops during the periods of mild frost. When the standard screen temperature is 5°-7°C, some plant injury is possible even if the Stage of ground frost is not reached. Valuable crops can also be protected by covering the ground with suitable material, e.g. paper, plastic or cellophane, to reduce the cooling of the ground through radiation.

Sunshine

Sunshine is not a limiting factor anywhere in India. Even during the monsoon, it is not the lack of sunshine but excessive rain that is responsible for occasional setback to plant

growth. However, continued cloudiness during flowering is injurious to all plants. It also creates conditions favourable to the multiplication of pests and diseases. High humidity, warm temperatures and cloudy conditions are conducive to most plant diseases.

Winds

High winds or squalls are experienced in association with cyclones, depressions and dust storms, and thunderstorms. High winds cause mechanical damage to crops, such as breaking or lodging. Light winds blowing from colder parts bring about a drop in temperature and create frosty conditions. Warm and dry winds cause greater losses through evaporation and result in water stress. Windbreaks planted across the prevailing wind directions afford protection to plants against damage due to winds. They are recommended as a useful method to reduce the evapotranspiration losses, frost damage, and soil erosion by wind.

Floods

Many parts of the country, particularly the areas drained by large river systems, suffer from devastating floods. Widespread floods occurred in many states of the country during large number of years. Magnitude of the flood depends on intensity of the heavy rainfall and its duration, and areal coverage. Shape and morphology of rivers, topographical conditions, melting of snow, wherever applicable, clearing of vegetation and associated increase of run-off and erosion by felling of forest trees etc.

A study on occurrence of floods during 1966-85 (20 years) indicates that large floods (river flow level exceeding the maximum safe height) occur as given in Table 2.19. The state-wise distribution of above-mentioned floods is as follows.

Bihar—36, Uttar Pradesh-34, Asom— 21, Gujarat and Orissa—1] each, Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal-8 each, Andhra Pradesh-3, Arunachal Pradesh-2, Delhi, Maharashtra, Punjab and Rajasthan—] each.

Thus, more frequent floods are noticed in the northern states, viz. Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Asom, Gujarat, Orissa, Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal. Flood-prone rivers are Brahmaputra, Barak, Gomti, Rapti, Gandak, Burhi Gandak, Bagmati, Kamla, Kosi, Mahananda, Yamuna,Upper Ganga, Sutlej, Beas and Ghaggar.

Apart from floods in rivers, flash floods occur in association with very high short- period rainfall intensities occurring in various parts of the country due to passage of low-pressure systems such as Depressions and Cyclones over those regions. Some of the examples of very high 1-day rainfall intensities recorded in different parts of the country are given below. All these values have been extracted from the latest IMD Normals based on data for the period (1951-1980).

The world’s wettest place of Cherrapunji in Meghalaya that is at a height of 1,313 metres above mean sea-level, has recorded a maximum daily rainfall intensity of 986 mm in a day. Agumbe and Mahabaleshwar in the Western Ghats have recorded 618

WEATHER AND AGRICULTURE

mm and 440 mm respectively. Very high | -day intensities occur in other mountainous areas in the Himalayas, Northeast and Central India and the Western Ghats.

Besides, some plain stations in East and West Coasts have also recorded very high 1-day rainfall intensities. These are locations where Depressions and Cyclonic storms cross from sea to inland. For instance the heaviest rainfall amounts in 24 hr in different stations, are as follows—Gopalpur (Orissa) 511 mm; Cuttack (Orissa) 321 mm; Kakinada (Andhra Pradesh) 501 mm; Nellore (Andhra Pradesh) 444 mm; Cuddalore (Tamil Nadu) 572 mm; Nagappattinam (Tamil Nadu) 403 mm; Fort Cochin (Kerala) 347 mm; Mangalore (Karnataka) 361 mm; Karwar (Karnataka) 350 mm; Vengurla (Maharashtra) 333 mm; Mumbai (Maharashtra) 576 mm; Broach (Gujarat) 460 mm; Surat (Gujarat) 459 mm.

Even in some interior plain stations located in arid to semi-arid zones of Rajasthan and Gujarat and semi-arid to sub-humid zones of Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal | -day rainfall intensity can be high. The daily rainfall intensities and the normal annual rainfall in some of the stations in the arid zone of Northwest India are presented below:

In these very dry zones the highest recorded daily rainfall intensities can be 71 to 113% of their normal annual rainfall, indicating possibility of occurrences of extremely high flash floods in these regions. This phenomenon occurs because heavy to very heavy rainfall occurs in association with monsoon depressions, cyclonic storms and other low-pressure systems during Southwest monsoon season in locations close to their tracks.Cyclonic storms during the pre-monsoon and post-monsoon seasons also cause very high rainfall intensities in these areas as well as in the interior peninsula. Heavy rainfalls associated with these disturbances occur over wide areas along the track of these disturbances. The point rainfall can vary from 400 to 800 mm per day. On an average, 7 disturbances during Southwest monsoon, 3 during post-monsoon season and | during pre-monsoon season occur in a year. Thus, for designing of flood- control reservoirs and estimation of flood potential of a region, information on depth- area-duration values of these storms is required.

Some of the long-term measures to minimize the damage because of floods consist in the aforestation of the upper catchment areas of the rivers, the construction of river embankments and the execution of multipurpose river valley projects. Individual farmers can lessen the damage to their crops owing to heavy rains and floods by making necessary drainage channels in their fields. Efficient plans must be drawn region-wise for forecasting floods and for arranging expeditious facilities to take timely action to save the standing crops from devastation by floods. A flood meteorological organization for the country exists in the IMD and the forecasts and warnings from them must be effectively utilized by the state departments concerned and the ICAR and SAU centres located in different agroclimatic zones of the country for issuing timely advices to the farmers for taking proper precautions and remedial measures.

CROP-YIELD FORMULATION

Weather elements, e.g. precipitation, temperature and sunshine, influence the yield of crops. In India, weather data are available over long periods for a large network of stations. Yield data for different crops for periods of more than 50 years are also available on district basis from different states. With the help of these data, Agro met Division of the IMD has evolved formulae to forecast the yield of principal crops for various states by using regression techniques. The linear correlation between rainfall and other recorded meteorological parameters and the yield of a particular crop over a large number of years have been worked out for overlapping periods of 7 to 90 days on a very fast electronic computer. The significant periods, thus located have been used for final regression analysis,

These studies revealed that technology comprising improved methods of farming, use of hybrid seeds and efficient use of fertilizers etc. have enhanced the yield in almost all the sub-divisions of the country, significantly so in recent years. The distribution of rainfall during crop-growing season plays a very important role in increasing the yield of kharif rice, temperature plays only a minor role. In wheat, the pre-season precipitation during September—October and temperatures during the growing season are the main parameters that control the yield. The in-season precipitation is of less importance.

As already emphasized, weather plays a key role in agricultural production in India that experiences diverse climatic conditions and soil types. In view of the same, monitoring of vagaries of weather at agroclimatic sub-region level and even district level is important. Considering this, the Indian National Commission on Agriculture recommended strengthening of research efforts on agro meteorological impacts on agricultural productivity. In response to the same, the ICAR has established a Co- ordinated Research Project on Agrometeorology with centres in various agroclimatic regions of India with its co-ordinating centre located at the Central Research Institute of Dryland Agriculture. The ICAR has also helped different states of India to set up Departments of Agrometeorology in SAUs. The ICAR has also set up Agrometeorology sections in all of its major Institutes. A number of All-India Co-ordinated Research projects on crop improvement of various crops, water management and dryland farming are already in operation. These organizations have taken up comprehensive research projects and field experiments to generate data for establishing crop—weather relationships for all the major rainfed and irrigated crops in different agroclimatic regions required for crop—weather modelling. Many regression relationships relating crop growth and development to weather, microclimate and water balance parameters have already been established for different agroclimatic regions in respect of important crops. Work is already in progress to develop and validate various crop growth and yield simulation models, viz. CERESWHEAT, CERESRICE, CERESMILLET, CERESSORGHUM, PNUTGRO, SOYGRO, CHICKPGRO and BRASSICA etc. in different ICAR and state research centres of India. Space Application Centre, Ahmedabad, National Remote Sensing Agency, Hyderabad, and Regional Remote Sensing centres of the ISRO have also carried out studies on crop condition assessment, and crop acreage estimation using thermal and optical remote sensing and developed

WEATHER AND AGRICULTURE

AGRO MET SERVICES REQUIRED FOR WATERSHED APPROACH FOR RAINFED AGRICULTURE

As already stated, rainfed agriculture is complex, diverse and risk-prone and is characterized by low levels of productivity and low input usage. Variability in rainfall results in wide variations and instability in yields. The bulk of the rural poor live in the rainfed regions. The challenge before Indian agriculture is therefore to transform rainfed farming into more sustainable and productive systems and to better support the population dependent onit. Impactstudies both onthe groundand through remote-sensing techniques have shown that watershed-based interventions have led to increase in groundwater recharge, increase in number of wellsand waterbodies, enhancementof cropping intensity, ‘changes in cropping pattern, higher yields of crops and reduction in soil losses. Hence at present very high priority has been accorded by the Government of India for the holistic and sustainable development of rainfed areas based on the watershed approach.

A watershed (or catchment) is a geographic area that drains to a common point, which makes it an ideal planning unit for conservation of soil and water. A watershed may comprise one or several villages, contain both arable and non-arable lands, various categories of land-holdings and farmers. The watershed approach enables a holistic development of agriculture and allied activities in the area taking into account various kinds of land use based on crops, horticulture, agroforestry, silvipasture and forestry. A large number of projects for productivity enhancement are being implemented based on the watershed approach. This is being done both through centrally sponsored schemes of the government, externally aided projects and private initiatives of local communities and NGOs.

Conservation and management of rainwater holds the key for sustainable agriculture in rainfed areas. In water resource management, the focus is not merely on development of new water resource but also on efficient utilization of already developed resource particularly based on indigenous systems. This is to be attempted through substitution of high water requiring crops with low water requiring crops and also through adoption of efficient methods of irrigation (e.g. microirrigation systems). All the long-term measures for improving crop productivity in dryland ecosystem such as soil conservation, i#-situ moisture conservation, rain water harvesting and recycling, impounding of rainwater for groundwater recharge and introduction of alternate land use systems like agroforestry system including agro-horticultural and silvi-pastoral systems and alley cropping are incorporated in watershed approach. The following items of Agrometeorological information are required for efficient operation of watersheds.

* Detailed delineation of sub zones of the watershed based on available water capacity of soil, physiography and rainfall.

+ Spatial and temporal variations of rainfall within the watershed.

* Rainfall types that occur in the watershed based on the date of commencement of sowing rains and amount of rainfall in the growing season and weekly and monthly rainfall probabilities.

Estimated values of weekly Moisture Adequacy Index, Soil Moisture Index and Water Surplus and Deficiency values based on Normal Climatic Water balance as well as water balance for individual years. Information on the occurrence of droughts and their severities.

+ Estimation of run-off water that would be available for harvesting by means of run-off modelling based on water balance approach.

AGROCLIMATIC ZONING OF INDIA

Several methods have been suggested for the classification of climates. Most widely known climatic classification methodologies are bioclimatological in nature and actually attempt to relate the extent and type of natural vegetation on the surface of the earth to climatic conditions. Some of such major climatic classification systems are Koppen, De martonne, Gaussen, Emberger, Troll, Hargreaves and Papadakis. It is Thornthwaite who suggested a rational classification of climate by introducing the concept of potential evapotranspiration (PE) and water balance procedure for estimating actual evapotranspiration of vegetation. The credit for introducing a scientific procedure of estimating potential evapotranspiration as the combination of estimates of energy balance and atmospheric drying power of air goes to Penman. Some of the major agroclimatic classification work done in India are given below.

Based on Thornthwaite’s method Dr V.P. Subrahmanyam of Andhra University, Waltair, classified India’s climate into 6 regions, i.e. arid, semi arid, dry sub-humid, moist sub-humid, humid and pre-humid, and 5 thermal efficiency types. Climatic classification work on the same lines has also been done at Institut — Francois, Pondicherry. In 1972, normal potential evapostranspiration of all meteorological stations was computed in India by Penman’s method, and using the revised Thornthwaite and Mather’s method for water balance calculations’ map of India delineating different climatic zones was prepared. Apart from the network of meteorological observatories in India, there are many state raingauge stations that are considerably more in number. So using rainfall normals of all these stations, climatic classification can be carried out in a more detailed manner by estimating normal PE by Penman’s method for these raingauge stations by interpolation. Since PE values are generally conservative, the same estimated by interpolation may be fairly satisfactory.

Distribution of crops, their production and seasons of cropping are influenced by climatic factors such as temperature and rainfall, perhaps to a much greater degree than other environmental factors. Crops differ in their requirements of day and night temperatures and humidity etc. and react differently to changes in the levels of these factors. Different crops have different moisture requirements too. Soil factors such as texture, structure, depth and topography affect the moisture-storage capacity of soil and hence the choice of crops. Thus, suitability of crops in different areas is to a large extent controlled by climate interacting with soil. Having these considerations in mind, the ICAR demarcated 64 soil climatic zones of India in 1964 by superimposing the isopleths of normal moisture index (P-PE)/PE (expressed in percentage) (where P is the normal rainfall and PE is normal potential evapotranspiration) and normal isotherms on a soil map of India showing major soil types.Crop production and yield statistics in India are generally available at district level only. So, for determining the efficient cropping zones of different crops, all the districts of India have been classified in 1988 into 40 homogeneous soil climatic zones of India. This work has been completed as a further extension of delineation of soil climatic zones of India mentioned above. The Planning Commission, as a result of a mid-term appraisal of the planning

WEATHER AND AGRICULTURE

targets of VII plan (1985-90) divided the country into 15 broad agroclimatic zones based on physiography and climate. Since these zones were too broad to serve the purpose of planning, the project team set up for each agroclimatic zone was advised to divide each zone into sub-zones under the National Agricultural Research Project (NARP) of the ICAR and SAUs. This has resulted in delineation of altogether 127 NARP agroclimatic zones for different states of India based on climate, physiography and existing cropping pattern. The ICAR in collaboration with SAUs has set up research centres in principal research stations for these 127 NARP agroclimatic zones. Major limitations of this approach have been non-uniformity of criteria used by different states and the principle of taking state as a unit for further subdivision. This has resulted in having similar characteristics of agroclimate and soil occurring in different states under different names.

An agro-ecological map of India was prepared at the National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land-use Planning of ICAR. The Council constituted a technical committee to finalize this map. Accordingly this map was finalized in 1990. This agro-ecological map was prepared by superimposing the bioclimatic map-cum-growing period map of India over the soil-scape map on 1 : 4 million scale. The derived homogeneous units were delineated adjusting the boundaries with the district boundaries to arrive at agro-ecological zone map of India with 21 agro-ecological zones. The length of growing period was computed for 350 meteorological observatory stations in India using water- balance approach suggested by FAO (1983) model.

Since the ICAR has already set up in collaboration with SAUs, research centres under NARP in 127 agroclimatic zones represented by NARP zones mentioned above and agro-meteorological advisory services including Medium Range Forecasting advises etc. are being issued for the zones, it appears desirable to continue these zones for crop planning and drought monitoring on the operational basis.

However, these zones can be further subdivided into subzones based on information on available water capacity (AWC) of soil (which takes into account soil type and soil depth), irrigation water availability and estimates of mean moisture-adequacy index (AE/PE in percentage) based on water balances computed using adequate number of years of rainfall data at various locations within this zones and interpolated PE values. This will enhance the efficiency of agrometeorological advisory services, issued to farmers by these NARP centres. Advices for contingency planning and mid-term corrections in droughts and weather hazards would be more appropriate if given on the basis of water balance compilation done during each year on operational basis for each of these subzones of 127 NARP agroclimatic zones of India. In view of high spatial variability existing in rainfall, AWC of soil, irrigation and cropping pattern in India, delineation of such soil climatic subzones within the already delineated 127 NARP agroclimatic zones would be extremely useful.

INCIDENCE OF PESTS AND DISEASES

The damaging effects caused by pests and diseases to crops are well known. Reduction in losses caused by pests and diseases by timely effective control measures considerably add to agricultural production of India. Incidence and spread of many pests and diseases are influenced by weather. Several studies based on actual field observations have been carried out in India at various SAUs, ICAR institutes and co-ordinated projects

of different crops relating weather parameters such as maximum and minimum temperature, relative humidity, vapour pressure, rainfall, rainy days, sunshine and wind speed, and experimental microclimatic parameters for incidence and population density of pests and diseases of different crops. A number of multiple regression equation models are available. Region-wise compilation of such information in respect of major crops classified according to different agroclimatic zones is required. The Agricultural Meteorological Division of the IMD has also carried out a number of such studies. A clear understanding of population dynamics of pests as influenced by different biotic and abiotic factors of environment is important. Knowledge of influence of weather factors not only on pests but also on their natural enemies is useful. Interactions between crop phenology and insect phenology have to be studied by degree- day concepts, so that the phenomenon of peak pest attack coinciding with the critical phenological phases of the crop can be avoided by suitable alterations of sowing dates, varieties and cropping pattern. Periods of optimum weather conditions for pesticide application such as absence of rain and intense solar radiation, and occurrence of light winds etc. should be identified for different regions so that suitable time schedules for pest-control measures can be given on operational basis in different agroclimatic zones.

Relationship of weather factors to plant diseases is used in formulating meteoro- pathological models. For this, knowledge of climatic conditions conducive for induction of sporulation, dispersal and penetration is required. Some of the earlier work on forecasting of severe epidemic of brown rust of wheat in Northern India has shown that weather charts would be a very useful tool in diseases prediction. For instance, synoptic situation favourable for a southerly flow of air as indicated by 700 hpa weather charts would improve the chances of prediction of the spread of the disease to central India. Insects like desert locust, armyworm, brown planthopper, black and cut worm cause severe damages not only in their breeding habitats but also at distant places as they migrate over long distances under the influence of prevailing wind conditions in lower atmosphere. Their flight duration depends on temperature, humidity, bright sunshine hours and other meteorological parameters. Forecasting schemes that use comprehensive weather information would be useful in the control operation of these pests. Many researches have reported that the path of desert locust journey is conditioned by large- scale weather systems like Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ).

Cloud signatures as seen in satellite observations would help in estimating the position of ITCZ and thus by utilizing the information on the position of ITCZ, areas likely to be affected can be known in advance. Locust infestations, hopper emergence, swarms and scattered adults have been observed in the past to be mostly confined to Rajasthan, Gujarat, Haryana and Punjab. When large swarms occur, they have spread up to Karnataka in the south and Asom in the east. The locust swarms in India are exotic in origin and the degree of danger due to them depends on the nature, type and magnitude of infestations further westwards. Once the swarms enter India, their further migration appears to be associated with the type of prevalent weather systems, orientation of the axis of the monsoon trough, low-level wind flow and the nature and the duration of precipitation.

The meteorological data are being used in some countries for forecasting the outbreaks of pests and diseases. The correlation between the environmental factors and rate of development of pests and pathogens forms the basis of such forecasts. In

WEATHER AND AGRICULTURE

our country also, more projects and experiments should be taken up for the purpose of issuing forecasts regarding the likely time of the incidence of particular pests or diseases and also for the purpose of control operations, such as spraying and dusting of pesticides. When plants are infested with pests and diseases, among other things, chlorophyll is destroyed and there is a rapid change in the colour of the plants from green to yellow. Infra-red photographs taken from aircraft and earth-resources satellites would furnish information on the state of crops over large areas, enabling the early detection of plant diseases and adoption of preventive measures.

WEATHER MODIFICATION

Delays in the timely onset of rains and breaks in the rainy spells during the cropping season are the 2 great problems that the Indian farmer has to confront with, especially those in the dry farming tract. During the monsoon season of some years, the rains abruptly cease over certain regions. Although clouds persist in those areas, their vertical extent is not large enough to precipitate. On such occasions, the clouds can be made to grow and shed their moisture as rain through appropriate seeding. Some of the principles relating to seeding are as follows.

Condensation

It occurs when water vapour changes to a liquid. For condensation to occur, air must be saturated and there must be a surface on which the water vapour will condense. For instance, dew forms on objects like blades of grasses. In the atmosphere, tiny particles in air serve as condensation nuclei on which water vapour in air condenses and becomes cloud droplets. Most effective cloud condensation nuclei are hygroscopic, i.e. water absorbent. These hygroscopic condensation nuclei are introduced in the atmosphere as a by-product of combustion from sources such as forest fires, automobiles and burning of coal or as salt from the ocean waves. The size of cloud droplets is very small (generally with a diameter of 20 microns (1) (1 =10~ metre). The typical rain droplet is of 2 mm diameter and so the tiny cloud particles have to grow to that size to become raindrops. The falling raindrops should be large enough, so that they will be able to reach the ground without evaporating while falling from cloud base to unsaturated air below. Since billions of cloud particles compete for available water vapour, their growth only by condensation process is very slow. So for precipitation to form, they have to coalesce (join together). The following 2 processes achieve the coalescence of cloud particles.

Bergeron process

Bergeron process is applicable for cold clouds, viz. clouds extending beyond freezing level (0°C) in atmosphere or clouds which have both their base and top above freezing level. Cloud droplets do not freeze at 0°C and they remain as super cooled liquid particles until temperatures reach -40°C. But super cooled droplets instantly freeze when they come into contact with solid particles that have crystal form like that of ice. Such materials are called freezing nuclei. One such material is silver iodide that is used in cloud seeding trials.

The main principle underlying the Bergeron process is that saturation vapour pressure above the ice crystals is lower than that above the super cooled water particles.

So when ice particles and super cooled water coexist in the cloud, if there is enough water vapour in air to keep a super cooled water droplet in equilibrium, there is more than enough moisture to keep ice crystal in equilibrium. This causes deposition (transfer of water vapour to ice) to exceed sublimation (transfer of ice to water vapour) and so there is transfer of water vapour to ice and the ice crystal grows in size. Since in this process, some water vapour has been removed, evaporation from the super cooled liquid particles takes place, creating additional water vapour in air that facilitates further growth of ice crystal. Since it is a continuous process, growth will be rapid. In a well-developed Cumulus cloud, there will be entirely water droplets in the lower portion, a combination of ice crystals and super cooled water droplets in the middle portion and only ice crystals in the top portion. So during the descent of ice crystals also, they grow in size by colliding with super cooled droplets that freeze on them. This process is known as riming. When sizes of the ice particles further increase, their fall velocities are larger facilitating further riming. By joining of 2 ice particles or by aggregation also their sizes increase. When these snow crystals grow sufficiently, they fall towards earth surface. On reaching 4°C level these snowflakes melt and continue their descent as rain.The technique of cloud seeding aims at correcting the deficiencies of nuclei in the cloud. Earlier cloud seeding method was to drop pellets of dry ice (frozen CO,) into the cloud. But this has disadvantages since large quantities of heavy dry ice have to be dropped from the top of the cloud. So, at present, popular material universally used in cloud seeding from an aircraft is silver iodide, produced in the form of smoke. Vapourizing an acetone solution containing silver iodide in a hot flame produces the smoke of silver iodide.

Collision-coalescence process

Heavy rainfall occurs from warm clouds also, viz. clouds located below the freezing level (0°C) as in clouds occurring in the Western Ghats and adjoining western coast plains of India and other areas during Southwest monsoon season. Ifthe precipitation is to occur from such clouds they must contain droplets of size 20 formed around giant condensation nuclei. When larger droplets fall fast through cloud, they collide with slow moving smaller cloud droplets and coalesce. The larger the particles, the faster they fall and increase the chances of collision and the rate of growth oftheir sizes. Due to frictional drag of air they break up into a number of small droplets and all of them collide with cloud drops and coalesce. Updrafts available in the clouds of sufficient thickness and availability ofabundant moisture would very much hasten the above process. This process applicable to warm clouds is known as collision—coalescence process.

It is very clear that large condensation nuclei are required for generating sufficient rain from the warm clouds. Common table salt (sodium chloride) is generally used as a material for seeding warm clouds. The seeding is effectively done with an aircraft flying inside the cloud. Before the formulation of coalescence mechanism, water in the form of large drops was introduced in the top of the clouds. But this did not have the desired effect.

. From seeding experiments undertaken in various countries, it has been established that there is generally an increase in precipitation by cloud seeding, but the quantities of precipitation realized through these experiments vary. In India, cloud-seeding experiments have been conducted at Jaipur, Agra and Delhi in the monsoon seasons

WEATHER AND AGRICULTURE

during 4—9 years, with the aid of ground-based generator, releasing common salt nuclei into the monsoon clouds. A general increase of 10-20% in precipitation has been observed in these experiments. Seeding trials from the aircraft also have been carried out over many parts of India. Further over the catchment areas of water reservoirs and dams, seeding can be profitably carried out, as any enhancement of precipitation would add to the water potential for irrigation and or electrical power. Experiments over the plantation crops would also be useful. Rain-making by cloud seeding can help to tide over a spell of drought significantly, if carried out successfully during critical periods of crop growth.

METEOROLOGICAL SERVICE TO AGRICULTURE

A network of observatories all over the country has been established by the India Meteorologizal Department. There are well-distributed surface observatories, Pilot balloon observatories for upper wind measurements, Radiosonde and Radio wind stations, Hydrometeorological observatories, Agrometeorological observatories and about 5,000 rain gauge stations. They collect information on weather parameters that form the basis on which daily district weather forecasts are issued by the main forecast centres at Chennai, Mumbai, Nagpur, Delhi and Kolkata as well as the forecast centres located in various state capitals. Besides the forecasts of general interest, Farmer’s Weather Bulletins are also issued, indicating periods of the onset of rain, probable rainfall intensity and duration, breaks in monsoon rain, spells of heavy rain and other adverse conditions of weather. Farmers Weather Bulletins are broadcast in different regional languages through the stations of All India Radio in their evening programmes for farmers.

For issue of specific meteorological advisories, meteorological and agricultural experts discussing jointly in the regional and state meteorological centers would be advantageous. IMD prepares Agrometeorological advisories twice a week in consultation with agricultural experts of the State Agricultural Departments. They are broadcast by AIR stations and also telecast by Doordarshan. The advisories contain, besides information on past and excepted weather, specific advice to farmers on weather conditions. The agrometeorological advisories are very useful to farmers for scheduling of irrigation to save water, and choosing the optimum timing for spraying of pesticides, application of fertilizers, etc. The Agrometeorological Advisory Service is functioning at 17 IMD centres located mostly at State Capitals, viz. Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Bhopal, Bhubaneshwar, Kolkata, Chandigarh, Chennai, Gangtok, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Jaipur, Lucknow, New Delhi, Patna, Pune, Srinagar and Thiruvananthapuram.It is thus possible for farmers to plan agricultural operations so as to take advantage of the favourable weather and mitigate the effects of adverse weather.

Medium range weather forecasting

The National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting (NCMRWF) was established by Government of India in December 1988 as a scientific mission to develop operational Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) models for medium range weather forecasting in India (valid for 3-10 days) and to set up Agro advisory services (AAS) units in research centres existing at present in 127 agroclimatic zones (NARP zones) established by ICAR in collaboration with SAUs under National Agricultural Research Project.

The NCMRWE runs now on operational basis at global and regional scales Numerical Weather Prediction models in their Super computer for forecasting weather in the medium range in India. Based on these models location-specific forecasts valid for 4 days are issued in respect of total precipitation, average cloudiness, average wind speed, predominant wind direction and maximum and minimum temperatures. These forecasts of weather elements are disseminated bi-weekly to AAS units every Tuesday and Friday over telephone or Fax or Internet or Very Small Aperture Terminal Communication System (VSAT). On receiving the forecasts, the scientist in charge of the AAS unit of the concerned SAU, generally an agro meteorologist, issues Agro advisories to farmers in consultation with an inter-disciplinary group of agricultural and extension specialists, such as agronomists, entomologists, plant pathologists, soil scientists and horticulturists. In many of these units, the Regional centres of ICAR coordinated Research Project on Agro meteorology are also colocated. The Advisory Bulletins usually consist of information on prevailing weather, and forecast weather. Information on the existing cropping patterns and relevant phonological stages of the crop concerned as well as crop-specific advisories on agronomic practices to be followed to minimize crop production losses due to biotic and abiotic stresses. Apart from dissemination through extension agencies and media, these bulletins are also communicated to progressive farmers. Regular feedbacks are also obtained from the recipients of forecasts.

OPERATIONAL DROUGHT MONITORING

Numerous attempts are being made by Central Research Institute for Dryland Agriculture, Hyderabad, Regional centres of ICAR’s All-India Co-ordinated Research Project on Agrometeorology and Departments of Agrometeorology and Agronomy of SAUs to develop models for providing response strategies to farmers to minimize risk to crop production and efficient management of pests and diseases based on weather information.

Weather advisory services to farmers

All this information would be taken into account while issuing crop-specific advisories by AAS units based on Medium Range Forecasts and Agro-met Advisories issued by IMD Agro-met Advisory Centres. It needs no emphasis to state in this connection that proper coordination is also required between these agencies and the District Agricultural Officers and district officers concerned with rural development, soil conservation, water management, watershed management and various extension officials of the state governments. Proper location-specific and crop-specific weekly advisories should be issued on operational basis. Suitable contingent crop planning

WEATHER AND AGRICULTURE

trategies and mid-term corrections should be communicated to farmers in case of elay in receipt of adequate rainfall for sowing, occurrence of prolonged dry spells in ‘rowing season, occurrence of heavy rainfall spells causing waterlogging, occurrence >f weather favourable to attacks by pests and diseases and occurrence of prolonged nonsoon. Since the above-mentioned agroclimatic zones (NARP zones) are fairly large comprising a few districts, there should be arrangements in these NARP research centres for drought monitoring based on water balance and crop conditions in different crop and soil subzones within the NARP zone, so that appropriate advices on contingency planning, mid-term corrections and supplementary irrigation can be given by the concemed district authorities for each district. Advices on dry seeding of crops wherever appropriate can also be given. Forecasts of rain during harvest operations that would damage the grains harvested would also be useful.