SOURCE_DOCUMENT: Chapter 7.pdf

7. Soils

Soil is a natural resource with which the existence of the human beings is closely associated. It is the mantle on the land surface that acts as a medium for plant growth. Soil may be defined as a subaerial natural object at dynamic equilibrium with its environment. Soils are formed by many complex processes of pedogenic factors, viz. climate, relief, organisms, parent material and time. Since different climatic zones have different characteristics, soils also differ according to these variations. This is the reason why we notice different types of soils in different regions in terms of colour, texture, depth, water reserve and nutrient supplying capacity. Since crop production depends on the soil characteristics, it becomes mandatory to know about soils in a greater detail.

PARENT MATERIALS

The process of chemical and physical breakdown of particles is known as weathering, which breaks up rocks and minerals, modifies or destroys their physical and chemical characteristics. The soils are therefore formed from their parent materials which are invariably derived from different rocks. There are three main kinds of rocks : (i) igneous rocks, (ii) sedimentary rocks, and (iii) metamorphic rocks.

Igneous rocks

They are formed by cooling, hardening and crystallization of lavas with varying chemical composition. These rocks are composed of primary minerals such as quartz, the feldspars, and the dark-coloured (mafic) minerals, including biotite, augite and hornblende. Igneous rocks with a high proportion of quartz (60-75%) are classified as acid igneous rocks and as basic igneous rocks when quartz content is less than 50%. The common igneous rocks found in India are the granites (acidic) and basalts or the Deccan Trap (basic).

Sedimentary rocks

These rocks have been formed from the deposition and recementation of weathering products of other rocks. The common sedimentary rocks are conglomerate, sandstone, shale and limestone. Alluvial, glacial and aeolian deposits form unconsolidated sedimentary rocks.

Metamorphic rocks

Metamorphic rocks are formed from igneous or sedimentary rocks by the action of intense heat and high pressure or both and thus bring in considerable change in texture and mineral composition. Igneous rocks are commonly modified to form gneisses and schists, and the sedimentary rocks such as sandstone and shale are modified to quartzite and slate respectively. The common metamorphic rocks are gneiss from granite, quartzite from quartz or sandstone, marble from limestone and slate from shale.

Lydia J:\2008\icar\hoa-2\02\ho2-07-00.pmd\181 (12.09.09)

Source: Chemistry of the Soil. Bear, F.E., 1965.

Chemical composition of rocks differ. Out of the total sediments of earth’s crust it is reported that igneous rocks constitute 95%, shale 4%, sandstone 0.75% and limestone 0.25% (Table 7.1).

Important minerals found in different rocks are as follows.

Feldspars: These are anhydrous alumino silicates of potassium, sodium and calcium. Quartz: It is silicon dioxide found in crystalline rocks. It also occurs as free silica. Titanium minerals: These include ilmenite (FeTiO,), sphene (CaTiSiO,) and more frequently rutile and anatase (TiO,)

Mica: Mica is an alumino silicate mineral dominated by potassium; iron, magnesium and sodium may be present in varying proportions.

Apatite: It is the common mineral containing phosphorus in rocks. It occurs commonly in basalt.

Clays: They are hydrated alumino silicates and are called secondary minerals.

Limonite: This is a iron-bearing compound. Table 7.2 Average mineralogical composition of different rocks

Carbonates: The frequently observed carbonate minerals are calcite (CaCO,) and dolomite (CaCO,, MgCO,).

Other minerals: Other minerals include tourmaline (a boro alumino silicate with alkali metals and iron or magnesium), rutile-titanium oxide, zircon-zirconium silicate, gleuconite-hydrated silicate of iron and potassium, apatite-calcium phosphate, sulphur-bearing minerals, etc. Allophane and the hydrous oxides of aluminium, iron and titanium also commonly occur in soils and more so in highly weathered and leached soils (Tables 7.1, 7.2).

we Chemistry of the Soil, Bear, F.E.,

SOILS

WEATHERING

Weathering is defined as physical and chemical disintegration and decomposition of rocks which are not in equilibrium under temperature, pressure and moisture conditions on the earth’s surface. Weathering is a combination of both destruction and synthesis. At the beginning, weathering creates parent material over which soil formation takes place. After that weathering and soil formation with further soil development proceed simultaneously. The weathering principally takes place by two processes, viz. physical and chemical. The physical weathering is also known as mechanical weathering or disintegration while chemical weathering is known as decomposition. At a certain point of time both these two processes of weathering are operative.

Physical weathering

The principal agents of physical weathering are as follows.

Temperature: Differential expansion and contraction of minerals in the rocks and minerals due to variations in temperature set up internal tensions, form weaker zones and gradually break them apart. High temperatures can thus accelerate process of physical weathering, especially in humid tropical climate.

Water: Flowing waters in rivers and/or rain water dislocate solid particles on the rocks and expose inner portion to the agents of weathering. Alluvium consists of such transported materials. When loaded with such sedimentary materials water with its tremendous cutting power can wear off rocks on the shore, and the glaciers in the high mountains. Ice is an erosive and transporting agency with high capacity and is also an important physical agent of weathering.

Wind: Wind acts as a carrying agent of detached particles through its abrasive action. Such action of wind is common in deserts.

Plants and animals: Growth of roots in the crevices of rocks and minerals cause gradual disintegration. The chemical weathering may also be accelerated through the release of organic acids from decomposition of litter and fauna present in the soils.

Chemical weathering

The chemical decomposition of rocks is effected through the process of hydrolysis, hydration, carbonation and oxidation and reduction.

Hydrolysis: During this, hydronium ions (from water) react with the weatherable minerals to form new groups of minerals in the soils. In the process, hydroxides of potassium, iron, magnesium, calcium, etc. are formed which can be adsorbed by clays and may be used by plants.

Hydration: This refers to the association of water molecules with minerals. It provides a bridge or entry for the hydronium ions to attack the structure and thus hastens the process of chemical weathering.

Carbonation: The hydroxides produced during hydrolysis react with dissolved carbon-dioxide to form corresponding carbonates which may either leach out or accumulate in soils according to drainage and weather conditions.

Oxidation and reduction: Oxidation is an important reaction in the well-aerated ks and soil material where oxygen supply is high and biological demand is low. nines ch the oxidation of ferrous iron is a disintegrating weathering process in ile iron is still part of the crystal structure. This is because ionic adjustments

to be made for a replacement of two-valent (Fe’*) ion in place of three-valent ion (Fe?) will help breaking crystal structure. During reduction (the reverse of oxidation), when the supply of oxygen is low but the biological demand is high, the ferric iron is reduced to the ferrous iron, which being more mobile, may leach downwards. In this manner, oxidation and reduction are responsible for weathering of minerals.

Soil is a complex heterogenous group of natural bodies. To study soil, it is therefore, necessary to group them into different classes or subclasses. Since different groups of soils perform differently in terms of crop yield and response to management inputs it becomes imperative to know different properties of soils by three levels of studies namely (a) soil formation (b) soil survey and interpretation and (c) soil classification and delineation in maps.

SOIL FORMATION

The weathering of rocks and minerals combined with the associated physical and chemical phenomena constitute the processes of soil formation. Soil formation is a complex process of several events. One process is distinguished from the another on the basis of the chemical nature of the events. The processes of soil formation include: (i) addition of organic and mineral materials, (i’) loss of these materials from the soil, (iii) translocation of materials from one point to another within the soil column, and (iv) transformation of mineral and organic substances within the soil.

(iv) transformation of mineral and organic substances within the soil.

Soil is developed through the continuous action of weathering depending on the environmental factors. The kind and intensity of weathering and processes of soil formation indicate degree of soil development, which may be understood by examining morphological and chemical properties of a soil profile. Soil formation is largely governed by five major factors, viz. (i) climate (eg temperature and rainfall) (ii) relief or topography of the area (iii) living organisms (vegetation) (iv) nature of parent material (type of rocks and minerals) and (v) time. Depending on the soil characteristics, a soil may be termed as young or old soil. The positional stability of soil over a long period showing the influence of intensive processes can form a matured soil. In the steep Himalayan region at Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Arunachal Pradesh, landslides and avalanches frequently move large masses of soil rocks. Similarly wind-borne deposits are common in deserts. The soil may not reach the stage of maturity in such cases where landslides and wind erosions are frequent. The soils in the active flood plains which receive fresh deposits at regular interval will also continue to remain youthful in terms of soil development. However, the flood plains which are away from the river bank and do not receive fresh deposits will continue to stabilize in the existing climatic conditions. This will allow the transformation process of minerals to become more active and thus forming relatively mature soils. Differences in relief play an important part in soil formation by draining away water and finer fractions from high levels to depressions and lowlands. Thus the soils formed at higher levels under low moisture conditions are coarse-grained as compared with lowlands which are finer in texture. Though soil differences in the initial period arise from differences of parent materials, yet in a large measure, they are profoundly modified by other factors of soil formation, namely climate, organisms, topography and time. Over 4 period of time significant changes take place in the parent material resulting in layers

SOILS

Soil profile

Each soil is characterized by a given sequence of horizons. Combination of this sequence is known as a soil profile which may be defined as a vertical section of the soil through all its horizons. A study of soil profile is important both from the standpoint of soil formation and soil development (pedology) and crop husbandry (edaphology). In deep soils, soil profile is generally studied up to a depth of 150 cm and in others up to the parent material. The layers (horizons) in the soil profile which vary in thickness have different morphological characteristics which include colour, texture, structure, etc. The horizons are generally designated as ‘0’, ‘A’, ‘E’, ‘B’, ‘C’ and ‘R’.

The ‘O’ groups are horizons dominated by organic material. These horizons normally occur in forest areas where decomposition of plant debris and dead animals are found. Depending on the form of organic residues which can be recognised or not, these horizons may be of two types OI and 02. ~

The ‘A’ horizon generally consists of sub-horizons rich in organic matter intimately mixed with mineral matter. This A horizon is characterized as zones of maximum leaching or eluviation. This horizon is designated as Al, A2 and A3 depending on the neamess to the surface.

The main feature of ‘E’ horizon is loss of silicate clay, iron or aluminium or some combination of these, leaving a concentration of sand and silt particles.

The ‘B’ horizon is below ‘A’ horizon showing characteristic dominant features of the concentration of clay, iron, aluminium or humus alone or in combination. This horizon is known as zone of accumulation or the illuvial horizon. The specific B horizons may be referred to as BI, B2 and B3.

The ‘C’ horizon is the zone where major biological activities are minimum and which is least affected by soil forming processes. It is therefore, a zone underlying A and B horizons and may be presumed to have given rise to the present soil.

All the profiles may not show the sequence of horizons mentioned above. Profiles developed due to in place weathering over a sufficient period show presence of horizons ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’. Since the formation of a soil and the development of profile are dependent on the varying genetic and environmental factors, variations in horizonation are frequent and common. Presence of well developed ‘B’ horizon may be an evidence ofarelatively mature soil which is commonly formed in the red and black soil showing all the ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ horizons. The young and recently formed soils on the other hand, may not always have ‘B’ horizons. These soils formed near the vicinity of the riverbank normally possess ‘A’ and ‘C’ horizons. Severe erosion at some hilly areas may erode surface ‘A’ horizons leaving ‘B’ and ‘C’ horizons only. These soils are known as truncated soils. In forest soils, ‘O’ layers may be found on the surface above ‘4’ horizon due to continuous leaf dropping and its decomposition and subsequent accumulation on the top of ‘A’ horizon.

From edaphological point of view, study of the soil profile is important since it indicates surface and subsurface characteristics and qualities, namely depth, texture, structure, drainage conditions and soil-moisture relationships, which affect plant growth. Therefore, the soil profile is taken as a unit of study which helps investigators not only to classify soils but also to understand soil-moisture-plant relationships. The study of soil profiles in the field, therefore, furnishes a base which has to be supplemented by broad constitution of soils; their physical, chemical and biological

properties are briefly discussed below.

The three phases of soil—solid, liquid and gaseous of the soil system have definite roles to play. The solid phase provides mechanical support for the nutrients to the plants. The liquid phase supplies water and along with it dissolved nutrients to plant roots. The aeration needs of the plants are satisfied by gaseous phase. The soil’s function to sustain plant growth is thus shared complementarily by its three phases.

Solid phase

Soil material less than 2-mm size constitutes soil sample. The solid phase is broadly composed of inorganic and organic constituents. Soils having more than 20% of organic constituents are arbitrarily designed as organic soils. Where inorganic constituents dominate, they are called mineral soils. The majority of the soils of India are mineral soils.

Inorganic constituents: The inorganic constituents which form the bulk of the solid phase of soil consist of silicates, both of primary and secondary origin, having a definite chemical composition and a well-defined crystalline structure. A soil may also contain a certain proportion of carbonates, soluble salts, and free oxides of iron, aluminium and silicon, in addition to some amorphous silicates.

Mineral constituents: The mineral particles in soils vary in size and proportion. There are sands and gravels in soils which are small rock fragments. The sands are smaller than gravels. Silts are smaller than sand but bigger than clay particles (Table 7.3). Clays are seat ofmost of the pedo-chemical reactions. These particles hold the nutrition and can release nutrient element as and when required by plants. The following section will highlight brief characteristics of commonly found clay minerals in the soils.

(Sizes in mm of particle diameter)

Clay fraction: The clay fraction consists of minerals in clay size (<2 mm). The minerals thus formed are crystalline. X-ray diffraction studies and electron microscopic investigations indicate that such minerals are composed of sheets of hydrated alumina and silica linked by oxygen atoms. Due to small size, they are highly reactive and form the seat of ion exchange in soil and thus control and regulate adsorption, retention, and release of many plant nutrients such as potassium, calcium, magnesium and phosphorus. The nature of clay properties depends on the type of clay minerals. The dominant among these clay fractions is the layer of silicate minerals which are formed by the silica (tetrahedral) and alumina or magnesia (octahedral) sheets. A few commonly identified silicate minerals are as follows.

Type minerals (1:1): It consists of one sheet of silica and one sheet of alumina. The two sheets are held together by hydrogen bonding resulting in a fixed structure. Consequently no expansion occurs when the mineral is wet. It has a low specific surface area, and a low cation-exchange capacity. Similarly, plasticity, cohesion, shrinkage and the swelling properties of 1:1 minerals are low. Dominant among these

SOILS

minerals is kaolinitic; others are halloysite, nacrite and dickite.

Type minerals (2:1): It consists of 2 sheets of silica and 1 sheet of alumina. Three general groups have the basic structure of 2:1 minerals, of which smectite is expanding minerals. Others are vermiculite and micas. Smectites are bonded together by weak oxygen-to-oxygen and cation-to-oxygen linkages. Smectites have high cation exchange capacity, plasticity and cohesion. Vermiculites do not expand and have high cation exchange capacity than smectites. Muscovites and biotites are the examples of micas mostly found in abundant quantity in sand and silt fractions. Properties such as exchange capacity, hydration, plasticity and cohesion are less intense in micas.

Type minerals (2:1:1): The typical example of this silicate group is chlorite. The mineral structure consists of typical 2:1 silicate layers alternated with a magnesium/ aluminium dominated trioctahedral sheet depending on the acidity/alkalinity of soils.

Mixed and interstratified minerals: Many clay minerals do not occur in soils as discreet particles of either1:1/2:1 or 2:1:1 type. On many occasions minerals identified in soils possess properties and composition intermediate between the well-defined 1:1 and 2:1/2:2 minerals. These minerals are termed as mixed and interstratified. The common examples are smectite-kaolinite, mica-vermiculite, chlorite-vermiculite etc. It appears that mixed layer minerals are more a rule rather than an exception in the soil environment.

PRIMARY MINERALS: Primary minerals found in rocks are the original source of all primary minerals found in soils. The most abundant are quartz and feldspars with relatively smaller proportions of pyroxenes, amphiboles, olivines, micas, etc. The primary minerals in soils are mostly concentrated in the coarse fraction.

SECONDARY MINERALS: Under conditions of weathering, the primary minerals are broken down to small fragments and even to molecular species such as silica, alumina, iron oxide, etc. The latter are capable of being synthesized into structurally different silicates which are called secondary minerals. They constitute the most active ingredient of soils with respect to most of the chemical, physical and mineralogical properties. The fraction with particles less than 2 microns (0.002 mm) is called clay fraction which possesses colloidal properties.

The soil clay fraction may be composed of, in addition to secondary minerals, clay minerals, hydrated iron and aluminium oxide minerals, and amorphous minerals; the secondary minerals are dominated in the majority of soil clays. The clay minerals are aluminosilicate in chemical composition and have crystalline structure. The oxide and hydroxide minerals constitute a sizable fraction of soils of humid subtropical and tropical regions, and probably account for variable proportions of iron and aluminium in those soils. The principal forms of amorphous minerals in soils are oxides and hydroxides of iron, aluminium and silicon and do not constitute significant proportions of soil clays except in highly weathered soils. Allophane, a prominent member of this group, has been reported in soils of volcanic origin.

PuysicaL Properties: Physical properties of a soil are important since they determine the manner in which soil can be used either for agricultural and non- vemeri purposes. Properties, viz. infiltration rate, water-holding capacity, size, report peraiion, plasticity sas meee piensa ovis are influenced by the major comport ae teem and mineral composition 0 ‘the soil particles. The four soils—inorganic or mineral particles, organic matter, water

and air vary with depth in different regions. The amount of water and air in a soil varies whereas the relative proportion of the solid components of the soil, remain unchanged.

Particle shape and size: The soil particles differ in shape like spherical to angular. They differ in size also from gravel and sand to fine clay (Table 7.3).

The International System is commonly used to designate textures while the USDA system is used for classifying soils according to Soil Taxonomy which is officially used for grouping soils in the soil-survey organizations all over the country.

Textural classes: The relative proportion of all the particles of different size groups in a soil is known as texture. The commonly reported soil textural classes are : clay, sandy clay, silty clay, clay loam, sandy clay loam, silty clay loam, loam, sandy loam, silt loam, sand, loamy sand and silt.

chemical composition. Coarse fraction, gravel and sand composed mainly of rock fragments or primary minerals, act as a individual particle. These particles have low specific surface area and are relatively non-reactive. Since these particles have larger voids they cannot hold water. The silt particles are intermediate between sands and clays. They are more reactive than sands due to higher specific surface. As far as major soil properties are concerned it is the clay fraction which controls them. They are made-up of secondary minerals called (crystalline) alumino silicates with highly reactive surface area. Retention of water and nutrients is also very high for the clay particles. Besides, the textural classes govern some of the important factors affecting plant growth. They are, (a) the movement and availability of water, (b) aeration, (c) workability (tillage operation etc) and (d) the content and transport of plant nutrients. Sandy soils are highly permeable and excessively well-drained with low water-retentive capacity and thus need more frequent irrigation for successful crop growth than fine- textured soils. The clayey soils can hold more moisture, but they have high wilting point (percentage) (Wilting Point—It refers to the level of soil moisture (on oven dry basis) at which plants wilt and fail to recover their turgidity even when placed in a dark humid atmosphere.). Due to poor infiltration rate these soils are subject to water- logging, resulting in poor aeration and workability. The moderately fine-textured soils, e.g. loams, clay loams or silt loams are by far the best group of soils for crop growth, since they have the advantages of balanced proportion of both sands and clays.

Colour: Colour signifies soil conditions and some important properties. A soil attains certain colour depending on the pedo-chemical reactions. For example different degrees of oxidation, hydration and diffusion of iron oxides in the soils may bring either red, yellow or brown colour. Dark colours of soils (eg. Dark brown, etc.) may be associated with impeded drainage conditions, content and state of decomposition of organic matter, the presence of specific mineral like titanium and/or manganese. Such dark colours are common in black soils.

The Munsell Colour Chart is routinely used for reading soil colour in the field. It consists of coloured chips showing hue, value and chroma, the three simple variables that form colour. The hue refers to the dominant spectral colour, the value to relative ligthness of colour and chroma to relative purity.

Density: Larger particles in soils are heavier in weight per unit volume than the smaller particles. Particle density of a soil is based on the individual densities of soil

SOILS

constituents and according to their proportionate contribution. The bulk density on the other hand, is the weight per unit volume of dry soil including the particles and pore space and hence it is lower than the particle density. The relationship between the particle density (PD) and bulk density (BD) and the pore space (P) of soils is as follows.

In most mineral soils the particle density varies within 2.5 to 2.7 and the bulk density between 1.4 and 1.8 depending on the method of determination.

Pore space: The portion of soil occupied by air and water is termed as pore space which is largely governed by structural conditions. Low pore space of about 30% is common for sands, whereas clays may have a pore space of as much as 50-60%. Although clays possess greater total porosity than sands, the pore spaces in the latter, being individually larger, are more conducive to good drainage and aeration. Pore spaces are of two kinds macro and micro. Sands have more macro pore space whereas clays contain more micro space. Therefore sands are more porous and do not pose any drainage problem in spite of its having less total pore space.

Plasticity and cohesion: Plasticity is a soil property which enables a moist soil to change shape on an applied force and retain this shape even when the force is withdrawn. Thus sandy soils are considered as non-plastic and clayey soils as plastic. Cohesion, on the other hand, is a property of the particles to stick to one another by cohesive force. Plastic soils are cohesive. Plasticity and cohesion reflect soil consistency and workability of the soils. Black soils are highly plastic and highly cohesive making tillage operation difficult.

Soil temperature: Soil temperature controls microbiological activity and other plant growth processes. It has been found that the role of organic matter decomposition and the mineralization of organic form of nitrogen increases with temperature. The amount of organic matter is thus expected to be more in soils with low temperature. Soil temperature is an important factor affecting seed germination, plant growth and microbiological activity. Germination has been found to be a slow process in a cold soil. For germination and root growth the required temperature varies with crops and varieties. The winter crops, viz. wheat, barley and oat require low temperature for germination as compared to summer crops like cotton and sorghum. The soil colour and composition, the water content in soils influence soil temperature. A dark and fine textured soil absorbs more heat during the day and lose it during night more quickly than the coarse-textured soils, because the latter retain more water and also since the specific heat of water is 4 to 5 times more than that of soil particles. The importance of soil temperature may be judged by the fact that Soil Taxonomy has kept a provision for soil temperature to use it as a differentiating criterion at the family level of soil classification.

Gaseous phase

The air-filled pores constitute gaseous phase of the soil system. The volume of the gaseous phase is thus dependent on that of the liquid phase. At any stage the sum of the volumes of the liquid and gaseous phases remains constant for a particular soil.

190 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

The nitrogen and oxygen contents of soil air are almost the same as that of the atmospheric air but the concentration of carbon dioxide is much higher. Too high a concentration of carbon-dioxide in the soil air may be toxic to plant roots. The gaseous phase supplies oxygen for root respiration which finally liberates carbon-dioxide. Gaseous exchange between soil air and atmospheric air ensures fresh supply of oxygen, and thereby prevents carbon-dioxide toxicity.

It is an established fact that restricted soil aeration affects root development, respiration and other biological processes and can thus change soil environment. As mentioned earlier, the pore space, not filled by water, is occupied by space (macropores) generally constitutes air space; the capillary pore space (micropores) being occupied by water. Normally if one-third of the pore space in the soil is filled by air and two- thirds of it by water, the plant growth is assumed to be optimum.

The soil air composition is controlled by a balance between two competing processes. The consumption of oxygen and with a concomitant release of carbon-dioxide by plant roots and soil organisms tend to increase differences in the composition of the soil air and the atmosphere above the soil surface. Gaseous diffusion tends to reduce difference in composition. The measurement of the aeration status in soil has been reported as oxygen diffusion rate (ODR) which determines rate of oxygen replenishment due to its continuous consumption by plant roots and micro-organisms. It has been found that growth of most of the plants is affected when ODR is less than 20 x 10% g/cm? per minute.

As observed in the atmospheric air (with an average compositioa of nearly 21% O,, 0.035% CO, and more than 78% N,), the soil air is also composed largely of nitrogen and oxygen, but differs from the former in containing more moisture, more carbon-dioxide and a little less oxygen. The content of carbon-dioxide varies during the crop season due to higher

varies during the crop season due to higher rates of crop growth and microbiological activities in the soil (Table 7.4).

Liquid phase

Bulk volume (40-50%) of the soil body is generally occupied by voids or soil pores, which may be completely or partially filled with water. A considerable part of the rain which falls on the soil is absorbed by the soil and stored in it to be returned to the atmosphere by direct evaporation or by transpiration through plants. The same is the fate of the irrigation water. The soil acts as a reservoir for supplying water to plants for their growth. Soil-water keeps salts in solution which act as plant nutrients. Thus, the liquid phase is an aqueous solution of salts.

When all the soil pores are filled with water or aqueous solution, the soil is said to be saturated. But this stage is transient under field conditions unless there is standing water very near the surface. Water starts draining off immediately from the bigger pores first; after a few hours (say 24 hours of water saturation stage), the downward flow of water is almost negligible and water is retained in the soil. Up to a certain limit, this water is utilized by plants. The pores which are drained of water are

SOILS

simultaneously filled with air. The maximum influence on the growth and yield of a crop depends on the availability of soil water, since it is required in larger quantity than any other substance contributing to the growth and yield. In relation to plant life water serves the following functions such as, (a) essential part of plant food constituting more than 90% of plant tissues, (5) solvent and carrier of plant nutrients, (c) maintains cell turgidity and regulates soil temperature.

Soil-water retention: The retention and movement of water in soils and plants with its subsequent loss in the atmosphere are related to the energy with which water is held. Different kinds of energy are involved in this process, viz. potential, kinetic and electrical.

The energy status of water is termed as free energy which is a sort of summation of all other forms of energy to do work. Three important factors which include the free energy of soil water are matric, osmotic and gravity. So far as retention of water in soil is concerned there can be four different forms of water as follows.

Maximum retentive capacity: This is the saturated state of soil just during heavy rains or while being irrigated when both macro and micro pores are completely filled with water.

Field capacity: After the soil reaches maximum retentive capacity, water moves downward in response to the hydraulic gradient, mostly gravity. After 2-3 days, the water in the macropores will be drained out. The soil is said to be at the field capacity.

Permanent wilting percentage or wilting coefficient: With time the water in the soil will be utilized by plant, some may be lost by evapotranspiration. The soil will gradually dry and plants begin to wilt first during the daytime and then they will remain wilted night and day. The soil moisture content of the soil at this stage is called the wilting coefficient or permanent wilting percentage.

Hygroscopic coefficient: When the contact of soil moisture decreases below the wilting point in a way that water is held very tightly and may be at a state of vapour around the soil colloids, the stage is called hygroscopic coefficient.

Soil-water classification: Based on the soil-water-plant relations, the soil water may be classified into the following based on its availability to plants.

Gravitational water: Water above field capacity (— 0.1 to — 0.3 bar* and upward) is termed gravitational. Since it remains in soils for a short time, gravitational water is of limited use for plants.

Capillary water: Since the water held between - 0.1 and 31 bars is present in the capillary of soils, this is mostly available for the growth of plants. The capillary water held within - 15 bar is relatively easily available to the plants.

Hygroscopic water: This water is held tightly (lower than - 31 bars) below the permanent wilting coefficient and is termed as hygroscopic water. Except few microbial activity almost all the plants fail to absorb hygroscopic water.

Crops differ greatly in their water requirement according to growth characteristics, climate and water-supply. Water requirement of a crop includes evapo-transpiration needs, water needed for metabolic activities, for leaching and other unavoidable losses. It is the water needed for raising a crop in a given period and is expressed as depth of water in millimetres. Generally, the water requirement of a crop is related to the potential evaporation during the growth of the crop.

Soil structure: Soil structure is defined as the arrangement of primary and secondary

soil particles. Soil structure is recognised as one of the most important properties since it influences aeration, permeability and water capacity. In the field, the structure is described in terms of (i) type (shape and arrangement), (ii) class (size), and (iii) grade (degree of aggregation).

Dypes of soil structure: Four types of primary structures are reported as follows.

I. Platy: Horizontal arrangement of particles around a plane is called a platy structure, 2. Prism-like: Particles arranged around a vertical axis and bounded by relatively flat vertical surfaces give rise to prism like structure. Prism-like structures may be prismatic and columnar types, 3. Block-like: Particles arranged around a point and bounded by flat or rounded surfaces form block-like soil structures. This type includes angular and subangular types, 4. Spheroidal: Particles arranged around a point and bounded by curved or very irregular surfaces that are not accommodated in the adjoining aggregates. This type includes granular and crumb types.

Classes of soil structure: Five size classes are recognised in each of the primary types. They are very fine, fine, medium, coarse and very coarse. The actual size for classes in each type varies.

Grade of soil structure: The grade of structure, representing degree of aggregation, can be determined in the field by noting durability of aggregates. Grades may be structureless (massive if coherent, and single-grained if non-coherent), weak, moderate, strong and very strong, depending on the stability of aggregates when disturbed.

Factors affecting soil structure: Structure is primarily influenced by texture. However, there are other factors such as: /. Soil management: Ploughing and other tillage operations may break soil mass and can thus adversely change soil structure. A good soil management, with a proper system of crop rotation has the effect of maintaining the soil in a good state of aggregation. 2. Adsorbed cations: The general trend of sodium and potassium ions on the clay complex have a tendency to disperse soil forming an undesirable soil structure. By contrast, Ca*', Mg?*, Al** ions on the other hand, have favourable effects on the aggregation. Similarly, the presence of soluble salts favours flocculation. 3. Organic matter: Organic matter not only stimulates formation of soil structures but also stabilizes them by forming bridges between individual soil particles and thereby forming water stable aggregates.

Since soil structure influences ease of tillage and root penetration, it has been found that the crumb and granular structure (spheroidal) are favourable for plant growth. It has also been found that soil management in terms of using legumes in the rotation system and green manuring can improve structure and physical qualities of soils.

CHEMICAL PROPERTIES AND SOIL COLLOIDS: Soil colloids refer to the most reactive part of the soil solids. Soil colloids can roughly be grouped into two phases namely organic and inorganic phases. The organic phase consists of either fresh or decomposed residues of plant, animal, and microbial residues which may remain associated with inorganic phase or may be present in free form. The inorganic phase of soil colloids is dominated by the clay which govern almost all soil properties. The nature and type of clay minerals has been discussed earlier. A few parameters related to chemical properties of soils are discussed below.

Calcium carbonate: Carbonates in soil are mostly of calcium with occasional occurrence of dolomite. Carbonates may be derived from the parent rock or may be formed in soil by interaction of calcium released during weathering with carbon-dioxide

SOILS

of biological origin. Because of low solubility, carbonates of calcium and magnesium may persist even in the soils of humid regions. Sparingly soluble carbonates are invariably reported as calcium carbonate. The presence of such carbonates in soil is detected from effervescence when treated with dilute hydrochloric acid. Soils which contain calcium carbonates are called calcareous, The US Soil Taxonomy has defined the calcareousness of a soil at the family level of classification stating that the soils in the fine earth fraction should effervesce (in cold dilute HCl) in all parts of the control section. The calcium carbonate may be present in pulverized form or as concretions of varying sizes. The pH of such soil is in the range 8.0-8.5.

Soluble salts: Soluble salts are released from rocks during weathering. In high rainfall areas, most of the soluble salts are leached down to lower depths. In regions of low rainfall, in soils of lowlying areas, or irrigated soils not having adequate drainage, the soluble salt content of the soil may gradually rise so as to limit plant growth. Usually the soluble salt content varies from 0.1 to 0.2% on a dry soil basis. Such soils are classified as saline. If the salinity is measured conductometrically, as is more easily done, it is expressed in dS/m. Extracted and measured under specified conditions if salinity of a soil is above 4 dS/m it is harmful. Cations commonly found in soluble salts are calcium, magnesium, sodium and potassium, while the anions are chloride, sulphate, carbonate and bicarbonate. In specific situations nitrates and borates are also present.

Free oxides of silicon, iron and aluminium: In the course of weathering and soil formation, oxides of iron, aluminium and silicon are formed which remain in the soil as such and/or get coated over soil particles. They can be removed by suitable chemical treatments.

Elements in soils: Soil supplies all the essential mineral elements required by the plants. Depending on their requirements these elements are grouped into two types: (1) macro elements: These are nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium and sulphur, and (2) micro elements: These include iron, manganese, zinc, copper, molybdenum, boron cobalt and chlorine. Besides, plants consume carbon, hydrogen

and oxygen from carbon-dioxide and water. Nitrogen is obtained through soil organic matter, The availability of plant elements depends on the type of soil. The total amount of elements contained in the soils depends on the nature of the parent material. The chemical composition of different horizons of a soil also shows a good deal of variation. Usually, some of the elements that are commonly leached out are the ones that are also required by plants. The percentage inorganic composition of some representative soils and of the successive horizons of the soil of a typical red soil from Mysore plateau are given in Tables 7.5 and 7.6.

Cation and anion exchange properties: lon exchan ge is a reversible process which

involves both cations and anions. The exchange takes place between solid and liquid phases and between solid phases which are in close contact with each other. The exchange of cations and anions is termed as cation exchange and anion exchange, respectively. Ion exchange is the most important of all the processes occurring in a soil. Soil colloids, are the seat of ion-exchange processes.

Adsorption and exchange of cations and anions varies greatly with the nature and amount of clay, and the organic matter present in soils. The cation-exchange capacity (CEC) is defined as the amount of a cation species bound at pH 7 (neutral pH) and is expressed as cmol (pt+)/kg. The average CEC values of reference clay minerals are:

As compared to cation exchange phenomenon, anion exchange properties have been less studied. By and large, adsorption of phosphate has been studied in relation with phosphate fixation which gives an idea about anion exchange property of soils. Accordingly, it has been suggested that the anion exchange capacity can be defined as the amount of phosphate bound at pH 4 and 5.7. In general, soils having low pH possess higher anion exchange capacity.

Base saturation (BS): The amount of CEC accounted for by the basic ions (calcium, magnesium, potassium, sodium) and expressed as percentage of the CEC is the base

SOILS

saturation percentage. Therefore,

A soil saturated with calcium and magnesium is considered normal and fertile. Ifa soil has more than 15% exchangeable sodium, it is considered sodic (alkali) soil. On the other hand, if the soils are base-unsaturated, i.e. the proportion of exchangeable hydrogen and aluminium are more, the soil is acidic. :

Organic matter: Although organic matter is a small part of the mineral soil, it plays a vital role in the productivity and conditioning of soils. Organic matter acts as a source of food for soil bacteria and fungi which are responsible for converting complex organic materials into simpler substances which are easily available to plants. The pressure of organic matter also helps to improve physical conditions of the soil in terms of its workability for seed-bed preparation. Presence of organic matter, clay and Ca in right proportion may form a good soil physical condition for better crop performance. Organic matter can also be used as a mulch and can prevent soil from soil erosion and losing soil moisture by evaporation.

Humus: Plant residues form primary source of organic matter in soils. Even harvested crops one-tenth to one-third of plant tops are commonly incorporated in soil as organic matter. Decomposition of animals in soil are considered as secondary sources of organic matter. Organic matter contains most of the mineral elements found in the plants. The decomposed materials often are found as a fairly stable dark, amorphous complex colloidal substance called humus which constitute about 60-— 80% of the soil organic matter. Humus represents a mixture of decomposed or altered products of carbohydrates, proteins, fats, resins, wax and other similar substances. These complex compounds are gradually decomposed by soil organisms into simple mineral salts, carbon-dioxide, water, organic acids, ammonia, methane and free nitrogen, depending upon the initial composition of the organic matter. They are amorphous, dark in colour, and have very high molecular weights varying from a few hundred to several thousand. The average composition of humus is as follows.

Composition of humus

Humic groups which constitute 60-80% of humus are classified into fulvic acid, humic acids and humin depending on their solubility in acids and alkalies. The similarity of these three groups of humic substances is that they are capable of absorbing and releasing plant available nutrients.

Organic matter in different soils: The organic matter content varies with soils, vegetation, climate, cultivation, manurial and crop rotation practices, and biological activities. Vegetation determines quality and quantity of organic material; climate, viz. temperature and moisture conditions determine rate of decomposition. The content of organic matter is generally low because of the high rate of decomposition under

tropical and subtropical climates. The organic matter in most of the cultivated soils rarely exceeds 1% except in a few hilly soils. The increasing level of CO, in the atmosphere leading to global warming is a serious concern throughout the world. Since soil temperature affects decomposition of soil organic matter, increasing soil temperature causes loss of organic carbon from soils. The following figures illustrate variations of the organic carbon of the surface layers of the following soil groups, soil orders and soils in different zones of India.

Range of soil organic carbon in different soil orders in India

Range of soil organic carbon in different agro-climatic zones in India

(Values are in percentage)

SOILS

The amount of organic matter decreases from surface soils downwards. In the forest soils due to continuous leaf fall the surface soils contains appreciable amount of organic matter.

Carbon-nitrogen ratio: Nitrogen plays a major role in the growth and reproductive processes of plants. The organic combination of nitrogen is present in soil organic matter. Since carbon makes up a definite proportion of the organic matter, it is expected that carbon to nitrogen ratio of soils should have a relation which has to be constant. This is important since this ratio is useful in controlling available nitrogen, total organic matter and the rate of decomposition of organic matter and thus influence soil management. The C:N ratio of upper 15 cm of arable lands ranges from 8:1 to 15:1 with an average value ranging from 10:1 to 12:1.

MICROBIOLOGICAL PROPERTIES OF SOILS: Soil is the habitat for enormous number of living organisms. Some of these are visible to the naked eye, whereas others are of microscopic dimensions. Roots of higher plants — soil macro-flora — belong to the first group whereas bacteria, fungi, actinomycetes and algae — soil micro-flora — belong to the latter group. The soil micro-flora are most abundant. A gram of fertile soil contains billions of these micro-organisms. The live weight of the micro-organisms may be about 4,000 kg per hectare and may constitute about 0.01 to 0.4% of the total soil mass. Significant among the soil micro-fauna are protozoa and nematodes.

Organisms in the soil: General observations of the important groups of organisms commonly present in soils indicate that both animals (Fauna) and plants (flora) are present in large amounts. Among plants include roots of higher plants, algae, fungi, actinomycetes and bacteria. The animal population can be broadly divided into two depending on their size, viz. macro and micro. The macro animals include herbivores and dentivores (eg. squirrels, mice, insects, ants, beetles, millipedes, woodlice, mites, snails and earthworms) while the micro animals largely consists of dentivores, predators or parasites (eg. nematodes and protozoa). Herbivores and dentrivores survive on plants and predators on other animals; parasites survive on the plants or other animals but do not consume them.

Although macro-organisms do have an influence on different soil properties yet the microrganisms in soils are more important in terms of many biochemical reactions. Plants cannot use organic matter as food element. Organic matter is decomposed by different kinds of micro-organisms available in soils in billions. Sugars, starches and proteins are broken down first; then cellulose and fatty substances (lipids); and lastly lignin or woody substances. The number of soil organisms vary greatly as determined by food-supply, moisture, temperature, physical condition and the reaction (acidity/ alkalinity) of the soil. In near neutral soils, bacteria dominate over other types of microbes. Fungi dominate in acidic soils. Algae are found in abundance near the surface or in soils which are moist.

The study indicates that bacteria form about 90% of the total population, actinomycetes about 9%, and the fungi and algae together about 1%. Among the soil fauna, protozoa are the most abundant, followed by nematodes, worms and insects.

Bacteria: Bacteria are single-cell organisms and can reproduce rapidly to increase their numbers in soil environment. A large size bacteria rarely exceed 4-5 mm with a minimum size range of < 2 mm. The bacteria can be rod like, round or spherical. On an average each kilogram of soil may contain a few billion to 3 billion bacteria. They

may be either autotrophs or heterotrophs depending on the source of energy.

Many autotroph bacteria can either oxidize or reduce different elements in soils, A group of bacteria (Nitrosomonas) convert ammonium compounds into nitrites which are again transferred into nitrates by other groups of bacteria called Nitrobacter. This process of conversion of nitrogen to nitrates is called nitrification. Another important activity in terms of nitrogen is performed by Rhizobium group of bacteria in symbiosis with leguminous plants to fix atmospheric nitrogen. Such symbiotic fixation has a great significance in the economy of soil nitrogen. A conservative estimate indicates 50-150 kg/ha/year nitrogen can be fixed by legumes in soils. Besides, a few groups of bacteria have also been identified which can fix atmospheric nitrogen. These are Clostridium and Azotobacter. A specific group of algae can also fix atmospheric nitrogen. These microbes are called non-symbiotic nitrogen fixers.

Actinomycetes: They are filamentous and resemble moulds in their growth and physiology and are often called thread or filamentous bacteria. These microbes are similar to bacteria in shape and size. Actinomycetes are sensitive to acid soils. Soil related common potato scab disease is transmitted through actinomycetes. Application of sulphur to lower the soil PH controls the disease. They grow in deeper layers of soils. They can synthesize chemical substances which produce familiar odour, when the sun-baked hot soil of a cultivated field receives first shower of rain.

Fungi: Fungi may be divided into three groups, viz. yeasts, moulds and mushroom fungi. Yeasts are not common in soils. Moulds are filamentous, and can sustain in a wide range of soil pH. Commonly found moulds are Penicillium, Mucor, Fusarium and Aspergillus. Mushroom fungi are common in moist organic residues. Some mushrooms are edible.

Algae: Algae are commonly found in large numbers in the top layers of moist soils, such as paddy fields and can fix atmospheric nitrogen due to presence of chlorophyll. Algae in soils are of four types, viz. blue-green, green, yellow-green and diatoms. Blue-green algae can fix atmospheric nitrogen in association with the aquatic fern called Azolla and can help in better rice production.

SOIL SURVEY AND MAPPING

Soil survey helps furnishing comprehensive information about soils and preparing an inventory of soil resources of an area. Soil surveys are performed in different steps. The base maps are first prepared for the area to be surveyed with the help of toposheets, imageries received through satellites, and other related maps on geology, climate and vegetation. The base maps show clear boundaries of different physical features of a landscape such as hills, valleys, plateaus and flood plains. These base maps are used in the second step to study soils horizon-wise. The locations of the soils studied are indicated on the base map. The soil descriptions are noted in the field and the samples are collected. The soil description and the laboratory data help soils to be grouped in a particular class. Depending on the soil information the base map is converted to a soil map showing soil groups in association. The objectives of soil surveys are both of fundamental and applied nature. Fundamentally, soil surveys help to expand our knowledge and understanding of soils as regards to their genesis, development, classification and nomenclature. The applied part of the surveys includes interpretation of soil data for use in agriculture, forestry, engineering, urban development, etc. It

SOILS

gives information on how to evolve a rational land use plan in a given area. Besides, it helps to correlate characteristics of soils and predict their adaptability to various uses under a defined set of management practices. It thus forms the very basis for planned and optimal land use.

Satellite imageries in soil survey

The use of satellite imageries has opened up new vistas in the field of soil survey and mapping of natural resources. Modern remote sensing technology has its beginning with the launching of the Earth Resource Technology satellite (ERTS), later named as LANDSAT. Remotely sensed data and imagery obtained in the visible, infrared and mircrowave regions of the electro-magnetic spectrum have proved highly valuable sources of resource information. With the help of digital image processing technique added with Geographic Information System (GIS), resource mapping has become fast, accurate and economic. With some background information on geology, physiography and vegetations, the imageries can be interpreted to prepare a base map which might help surveyors for checking and finalizing soil boundaries in the field.

Type of surveys: Depending upon the method, the intensity of the survey and the scale of the base map, soil surveys can be of two types, namely (a) reconnaissance surveys and (5) detailed surveys.

Reconnaissance soil survey: The scale of mapping for reconnaissance survey is 1:50,000 (1 cm = 0.5 km or larger). For preparing base maps either the Survey of India toposheets or aerial photographs are used. Mapping follows the initial interpretation of the base maps with a legend. The unit of mapping is soil series or an association of soil series. The intensity of profile examination or the auger-bore observation depends on the heterogeneity of the land and soil features. These surveys help to identify benchmark soils for delineating problem and potential areas and providing information useful for a broad land-use planning and agricultural development at state and district levels. The reconnaissance survey carried out at a scale of 1:250,000 (1 cm = 2.5 km) produce maps for planning at the national level. Such soil information for the entire country is now available. National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land Use Planning (ICAR), Nagpur, has completed soil survey at 1:250,000 scale for all the states of the country.

Detailed soil survey: Cadestral maps of 1:8000 (1 cm = 80 m) or larger, or aerial photographs of 1:20,000 (1 cm = 0.20 km) or larger are used as base maps. Now-a- days remotely (—) sensed geocoded imageries in the scale of 1:12,000 (1 cm = 0.12 km) are available for much detailed surveys so as to delineate phases of soils, their slopes, erosion. Depending upon the land and soil heterogeneity and the extent of details required, the profile and auger-bore observations are made at closer intervals and the soils are mapped at the level of phases of different series.

The detailed soil maps are useful for understanding soil and land problems and for different conservation measures to control soil erosion, to fix irrigation schedule depending on the soil and crop requirements. Such information is also useful for watershed development.

Soil maps of India: statewise and combined

During the past 20 years, National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land Use Planning

has mapped soil resource of the country at 1:7 m scale at soil suborder association level totalling about 103 soil suborders. For sustainable resource management in the late 80’s the need of large scale mapping of soil and climatic resources of the country was felt. Soil resource mapping of India was initiated in 1986 using a 3-tier approach comprising image interpretation; field mapping and laboratory analysis; and cartography and printing. Soil resource inventory of all the states and union territories was completed in 1995 on 1:250,000 scale and printed in 1:500,000 with a few exceptions (Table 7.7). One hundred seventy six false colour composites (FCC’s) and B/W infra red imagery on 1:250,000 scale were interpreted visually to prepare prefield physiography-cum-photomorphic maps, based on physiographic regions and sub regions, geology, terrain, environmental conditions, landscape elements and image characteristics. To achieve geographical location and scale accuracy, the physiographic

SOILS

helped to distinguish different groups of soils that occur in various parts of the country. Such information has been utilized in preparing generalized soil maps of the country showing geographical distribution of various soils distinguished by major differentiaing characteristics. Earlier Govindrajan and Rao (1971) had reviewed distribution of 24 major soil groups which has been shown in Table 7.8.

The Soil Resource Mapping programme of the entire country in a span of about 10 years (1986-1996) has generated tremendous database in terms of soils, their area and extent, characteristics and grouping following Soil Taxonomy (Soil Survey Staff, 1999). The data indicate that 13.5 % of Alfisols, 40% of Inceptisols, 4% Aridisols, 28% Entisols, 8.5 % Vertisols and 2.5% Ultisols occur in India as shown in Table 7.9.

SOILS

Soil survey interpretation and use of soil maps

Different types of interpretative groupings can be developed from the data collected during the soil survey and can be supplemented with laboratory characterization. Thus the soil-survey data and soil maps can be interpreted for land capability, soil and land irrigability classification, engineering uses, etc. One of the most important use of soil map is its use for preparing a host of thematic maps. Based on the soil suitability characteristics of different crops suitability maps for almost all the agricultural, horticultural and plantation crops can be prepared. Besides, thematic maps on different soil properties, viz. pH, CEC, base saturation, depth of soil can be prepared. Soil information along with site characters can also help in preparing thematic maps on the natural calamities like proneness to flooding, land slides etc. Depending on the scale of survey such interpretative maps can be fruitfully utilized for many developmental purposes.

Land-capability classification: The land-capability classification, an interpretative grouping of soils for agricultural purposes, is based on (a) soil characteristics, (5) site characteristics features, and (c) environmental factors. The land capability classification system is designed primarily for soil conservation and is intended for determining maximum intensity of land use, consistent with low erosion risks and sustained productivity. The classification of soil units mapped into capability groupings enables one to understand (i) hazards of the soil to various factors which cause soil damage, deterioration in fertility, and (ji) its potentiality for production. The emphasis of the system is on the environmental factors that cannot be modified practically. Thus physical soil features such as texture, are assigned greater significance than chemical characteristics such as pH. Poor soil drainage would lower land class if it could not be rectified by field drainage. Similarly, soils with a drought hazard need not be downgraded if supplementary irrigation becomes economically feasible. Economic factors are thus recognized implicitly rather than explicitly. The capability classification provides three major categories: (i) capability class (i/) a capability sub-class, and (iii) a capability-unit. ‘

Capability class: Eight capability classes are recognized. The risk of soil damage or limitations in use progressively increases from class I to class VIII. Soils in classes I to IV are arable. They are capable of producing commonly cultivated crops of the region under good management. Soils in classes V to VII are suited to adapt native plants, pasture or forestry. Soils of class VIII are neither suitable for agriculture nor for silviculture. The capability classes are briefly described below.

Capability unit: The capability unit is a grouping of soils that have almost the same influence on production and responses to the systems of management of common cultivated crops.

Capability sub-class: The capability sub-class is a grouping of capability units having similar limitations and hazards. Based on the number and severity of limitations which downgrade the capability class, four limitations have been recognised, viz. (i) erosion, (ii) wetness, (iii) shallowness of the root-zone, and (iv) climate. Depending on the severity of the limitations such as erosion, wetness etc the land units 1,2,3 may also be used.

Arable land: Class I: The soils in class I have only a few limitations that restrict their use. The soils are nearly level, deep, well-drained, with good water-holding

SOILS

capacity. They are productive and suitable for intensive cropping. Class IJ: These soils have some limitations that. reduce choice of crops and require moderate conservation practices to prevent deterioration, when cultivated. The soils may be used for raising most of the cultivated crops. Class III: These soils have severe limitations that reduce choice of crops, and require special conservation practices when used for-raising cultivated crops. The limitations of soils in class III are more than those in class I and, therefore, need careful management. Class IV: The soils of this class have very severe limitations that restrict choice of crops to only a few and require very careful management. The cultivation of crops may be restricted to once in 3 or 4 years. Conservation measures are more difficult to apply and maintain in these soils.

Non-arable land: Class V: The soils in class V have little or no erosion hazard, but have other severe limitations, such as wetness or overflow, as in the case of low-lying lands which prevent normal tillage for common cultivated crops. These restrictions limit their use to pasture or adaptable tree species. Class VI: These soils have severe limitation to depth, slope, erosion hazard, etc. that make them unsuitable for cultivation of normal crops. Their use is restricted to pasture and silviculture. Class VII: This class soils have more limitations than those of class VJ and make them totally unsuitable for cultivation of crops and restrict their use only to grazing. Class VII: The soils of class VIII have very severe limitations that preclude them from being used for agriculture or silviculture. Their use is restricted to recreation or wildlife.

Land irrigability classification: The interpretation of soils and land conditions is concerned primarily with predicting behaviour of soils under greatly altered water regime brought about by introduction of irrigation. For irrigation projects, special interpretation and classification of soils for sustained use under irrigation are often required. The soils are first grouped into soil irrigability classes according to their limitations for sustained use under irrigation, regardless of their location. Soil irrigability classes are useful to make groupings of soils according to their suitability for sustained use under irrigation. The classes are defined in terms of the degree of soil limitations. Definitions of the five soil irrigability classes are as follows:

Soil irrigability class Definition

Criteria for classes are quantitatively defined and are exclusive in such a way that a soil can qualify for only one class. For example, a soil may have all the properties of the most desirable class except one; but on the basis of this one undesirable property it Is assigned to a lower class.

The suitability of land for irrigation depends on physical and economic factors in addition to soil irrigability class. The basic system is intended to reflect the payment capacity of the land to support agricultural production. Ideally as is illustrated in FAO,

farm budgets are used for evaluating costs and benefits, initially for the best land (class 1). Less suitable land is then graded according to the economic effects of a number of physical land defficiencies acting singly or together; these are considered under the basic headings soil(s), topography (t), and drainage (d).

Soil irrigability classification is made on the basis of the important soil characteristics, viz. soil texture, depth, available water holding capacity, infiltration and permeability. The four main classes are:

Class 1

Class 2 : Arable (suitable for irrigation) Increasing payment capacity from Class 3 3 to class 1.

Class 6 : Non arable

For detailed studies, two additional special classes are recognised.

Class 4 : Suitable for special use or restricted crop range.

Class 5 : Temporarily non arable (Pending further study of problems).

Soil suitability for crops: Each plant requires definite soil and climatic conditions for optimum growth. Since the availability of both water and plant nutrients is largely controlled by the physico-chemical properties and micro-environments of soils, the success and failure of any species in a particular area is, therefore, governed by soil characteristics.

Several soil-site studies for different plant species have been reported in the literature. These illustrate how soil depth, sub-soil texture, salinity and drainage conditions are related to site quality. The objectives of various site evaluation studies are to predict and classify land for plant growth. Since such evaluation of land has gained high popularity in almost every land development programme, the objective of this section is to develop criteria for soil-site evaluation on the basis of the available soil and site characteristics, so that the soil maps can be interpreted in terms of suitability for agricultural crops and/or forest plantations.

Suitability criteria: Most plant species need well drained, moderately fine to medium-textured soils, free of salinity and having optimum physical environments. Based on the suitable parameters, soil map can help in predicting behaviour and suitability of soils for growing crops and other tree species after establishing suitability criteria. The FAO panel for land evaluation defined concept of land utilization of types and suggested the classification of land for specific use. The classification itself is presented in different categories: orders, classes, sub-classes and units. There are two orders (S for suitable and N for unsuitable land) which reflect kinds of suitability. There are 3 classes (S 1-3) under the orders S and 2 classes (N 1-2) under the order N reflecting degrees of suitability within the order. The appraisal of the classes within an order is done according to evaluation of land limitations or the main kinds of improvement measures required within classes. The limitations are: climatic (c), topographic (t), wetness (w), salinity (n), soil fertility (f) and physical soil limitations (s). They are indicated by the symbol for example S2w; here S indicates wetness limitation (subclass). The limitation approach has successfully been used to provide a qualitative land evaluation based on general characteristics which are made available after a quality soil survey and a general study of other resources. Sys (1976) proposed a scheme for evaluating the degree of limitation rating with the following general

SOILS

observations:

0 (No limitation) Optimum Crop Growth

1 (Slight limitation) Nearly optimum for Crop Growth

2 (Moderate limitation) — Moderate influence on Crop Growth decline

3 (Severe limitation)

SOIL CLASSIFICATION

Soils vary in their characteristics and properties. They are classified to establish interrelationships between their characteristics. Understanding properties of soils is important in respect of the optimum use they can be put to and the best management requirements for their efficient and productive use. Classification helps reduce study of the number of individual soils to a few well-defined units. It helps to develop a legend for mapping soils during the surveys, and to group soils having comparable characteristics in a systematic manner.

Different ystems of soil classification have been used to classify and group soils in a meaningful manner for serving different purpose. Soil Taxonomy of the USDA has been evolved for a better acceptability. As a result decision was taken at the All-India Workshop in 1969 to use this system officially, by the Government of India. Soil Taxonomy is a multi-category hierehical system which has six categories, namely, orders, sub-orders, great groups, sub-groups, families and series. Thus the number in the higher categories is fixed, whereas in the lower categories, it is variable. While phases of soil series are used as mapping units in detailed soil surveys, the associations of soil series or soil families are used as mapping units in reconnaissance soil surveys. The progressive abstraction and compilation of reconnaissance maps help one to construct small-scale maps at the state and country levels with the associations of higher categories (such as order, suborder or great group associations) as the mapping units.

Systems of classification

Old systems: Early systems of soil classifications were simple and practical. The aim of these systems was utilitarian, with emphasis on the internal fabric and characteristics.

Economic classification: One of the earliest systems of soil classification was for the purposes of taxation. The criteria used were soil colour and texture in combination with the potentialities for irrigation; for instance, soils suitable for growing wheat, rice, groundnut or cotton. Such a system has a disadvantage since the change in land- use pattern makes this grouping obsolete.

Physical classification: It is based on the soil texture, a property associated with soil productivity. The soils were termed as loamy, sandy and clayey. Development of advanced scientific ideas on soil studies extended these observations on other properties which include pH, calcareousness, salts and availability of plant nutrients such as nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium.

Chemical classification: The grouping of soils by their chemical composition was done following chemical properties of soils for example, calcareous soils, gypsiferous soils, acid soils and alkaline soils.

Geological classification: Earlier geologists and geographers recognized close relationship between soil and its parent rock and accordingly proposed a soil classification system based on the parent material, viz. (a) Residual or Sedentary Soils: These soils are developed in-situ from the underlying rocks like basalt, limestone or sandstone and (5) Transported Soils: developed on unconsolidated sediments, like alluvium, colluvium or aeolian materials.

Such formations were reflected in the nomenclature used to describe them e.g. sandstone soils, alluvial soils and aeolian soils. These attempts, however, failed to recognize the dynamic processes of soil genesis, controlled by climate and vegetation — the two active factors of soil formation — which overcome influence of parent material with the passage of time and hence upset geological system of classification. However, knowledge of the geology of the parent material is of great value in explaining many properties of a soil.

Physiographic classification: This system of classification permits use of the characteristics of the landscape. Accordingly the soils may be grouped as levee soils, basin soils, terrace soils, mountain soils, hilly soils, upland soils and lowland soils. Since soils on different physiography may bear similar characteristics this system of soil grouping has a limited value in the modern-day concept of soil in terms of its genesis from a variety of parent materials.

Recent systems of soil classification: While working in the Central Russian Upland, Dokuchaiev realized the importance of the differences in climatic elements which were associated with important vegetation patterns. These observations paved the way to establish the concept of soil as an independent natural body. The Russian approach to soil classification is thus naturally tended to emphasise on soil genesis to justify the Genetic System of soil classification.

Genetic system of soil classification: The first classification of soil, as proposed by Dokuchaiev (1900), divides soils into three categories; Normal, Transitional and Abnormal Soils (Table 7.10). These categories were later termed as zonal, intrazonal and azonal soils respectively.

Class A — Normal Soils (Zonal Soils) Zones Soil type Boreal Tundra (dark brown) soils Taiga Light-grey podzolised soils Forest steppe Grey and dark-grey Steppe Chernozem Desert steppe Chestnut and brown soils Aerial or Desert zone Aerial soil (brought down by wind), yellow soils, white soils, etc. Subtropical and zone of tropical forests Laterite or red soils Class B - Traditional Soils (Intrazonal Soils) Dryland Moor soils, or Moor meadow soils Carbonate-containing soils Secondary alkaline soils Class C - Abnormal Soils (Azonal Soils) Moor soils Alluvial soils Aeolian Soils (brought down by wind)

SOILS

Concept of zonality: The zonal soils are those soils which have developed soil profiles and are in equilibrium with the environmental conditions, such as climate and vegetation, (examples Sierozem, Chestnut, Podzol and Laterites). The soils, where time has been a limiting factor to produce horizonation are termed as azonal soils. Most of the recent (Late Holocene) alluvial deposits or dunes or severely eroded areas support the concept of azonal soils, (examples Alluvial soils and Regosols). The other remaining soils could occur within the zonal areas with specific soil characteristics that are determined by the local conditions, viz. topography, specific parent material. These soils are known as intrazonal soils, (example calcimorphic soils and hydromorphic soils). Although the Russian approach was based on sound principles of soil genesis, yet the approach has some inherent weakness such as undue emphasis on climate and vegetation rather than on soil properties. However, the principles of the Russian approach are still valid and are therefore used in different soil classification systems developed to-date. The systematic soil surveys began sometime in 1899 in USA. The early classification of soils, as used by the National Soil Survey used to emphasize the soil texture and parent rock.

Coffey ’s system: Coffey (1912) emphasized that soils, as independent natural bodies, should be classified on the basis of their own properties. He proposed five major classes of soils such as: arid soils, dark-coloured Prairie soils, light-coloured timbered soils, black swamp soils and organic soils. Each class was subdivided into series on the basis of parent material and the series into types on the basis of surface soil texture.

Morphogenetic system of soil classification: Marbut advocated classification soils on the basis of their own properties rather than on the basis of soil-forming factors. He reduced emphasis on geology or parent rock and evolved his scheme of soil classification based on the iron-alumina and lime content. At the highest categoric level, the zonal soils were divided into 2 classes, viz. pedalfers and pedocals; the former showing accumulation of iron and aluminium and the later accumulation of calcium as calcium carbonate. The Pedalfers were presumed to occur in areas of high rainfall having real surplus of water for leaching. The pedocals on the other hand occur in areas of high evaporation having real deficit of water. This system of soil classification is based on soil morphology and therefore stresses on the need for examination of actual soils for their characteristics, like soil colour, texture, structure, consistency, thickness and arrangement of horizons, drainage condition, nature of parent material, occurrence of lime or soluble salts and kind of organic matter.

Genetic approach of soil classification: The morphogenetic system of Marbut was revised and elaborated by Baldwin, Kellogg and Thorp in 1938 (Table 7.11), which marked the beginning of a comprehensive approach of soil classification system. The salient features of the system include: a return to the zonality concept of Russian School, stress on the pedocal-pedalfer concept, and more emphasis on soil as a three- dimensional body and its characteristics. Besides, a new category, viz. soil family, was introduced between great soil group and soil series. The soil families and the higher categories however, were not defined in terms of soil properties.

Serious problems arose when soil series did not fit in any of the existing great soil groups. As a stop-gap strategy, Thorp and Smith (1949) revised the system in which three new great soil groups were defined and three others were grouped with existing great soil groups. According to the revised system the soils were grouped in 3 orders,

viz. zonal, intrazonal, and azonal, following the Russian zonality concept.

Zonal soils: The characteristics of the zonal soils are determined primarily by the environment, especially climate and vegetation. The differences due to the parent material are rendered subordinate by dominating climatic influences. The soils are termed as zonal because development of their profiles closely corresponds to the climatic and vegetation zones in which they occur.

Intrazonal soils: The soils occur within a zone, but reflect influence of some local conditions such as topography and/or parent material. Under these conditions, the characteristics imparted by the local conditions predominate.

Azonal soils: The soils have poorly developed profiles because of time as a limiting factor. They include young soils without horizon differentiation. The soils developed on recently laid alluvium or colluvium belong to this group.

These three orders are further subdivided into 9 suborders on the basis of specific climatic and vegetative regions. Each of the suborder, in turn, is divided into great soil groups which are an expression of more specific conditions. The great soil groups are further subdivided into numerous soil families, series and soil types. According to Kellogg (1963) most systems of soil classification, as used in 1950’s, including that of the USA, has one or more serious limitations as most of these over-emphasized the virgin soils. It indicates that different schools of thought, inevitably, need some compromise on their divergent opinions to classify arable soil. The system should be based on combinations of soil characteristics known to be significant to genesis and behaviour, but not directly on either. In other words, the classification must be one that can be interpreted in terms of genesis and behaviour, but that genesis and behaviour

SOILS

should be one step backward than the classification itself.

Soil taxonomy (A comprehensive US system of soil classification): In order to overcome the shortcomings and to achieve the above objectives, the US Soil Survey Staff in cooperation with many other institutions, under the leadership of Guy D. Smith, worked since 1951 to arrive at a classification that narrows differences in different view points. Each year, starting from 1953, an approximation was produced and tested. In 1960 a comprehensive system of soil classification, popularly known as the “7th Approximation” was published. The system was put into official use in the USA and adopted in many other countries including India, Iraq, Belgium and Holland. A supplement to 7th Approximation appeared in 1964 and another in 1967. Ultimately in 1975, the system was brought out as Soil Taxonomy which was later revised in 1999, the latest being a key to Soil Taxonomy in 2006. From its inception, soil taxonomy was designed to serve soil survey needs. The nature of the kinds of differentiating characteristics employed in the various categorical levels of the Soil Taxonomy is given in Table 7.12 and simplified key to soil orders in Table 7.13.

The comprehensive US Soil Taxonomy system is based on measurable soil properties. It takes care of all the soil properties associated with the soil genesis. The nomenclature is derived mainly from Greek and Latin words. Apperantly it is difficult to understand for the beginners; with little practice the categorical grouping of this system can be appreciated since the nomenclature itself connotes the major soil characteristics. The Soil Taxonomy is based on the properties of soils as they exist today. This system has an in-built mechanism to permit addition of new soil groups at any categorical level, even up to order. Mention must be made about the recent inclusion of two soil orders namely Andisols and Gelisols. According to Travernier (1963) this US system of Soil Taxonomy may be considered as the greatest contribution to classification in recent years. Smith (1963) mentioned other advantages of this system

*“B.S. = (Exchangeable Ca” + Mg** + K* + Na*)/CEC, , x 100; CEC = cation exchange capacity. namely, viz. (i) the system allows grouping soils rather than soil-forming processes, (ii) it focusses attention on the soil rather than on other related branches of science such as geology and climatology, (iii) the system is flexible to group soils even with unknown genetic history, (iv) it provides a greater uniformity of soil grouping as applied by different soil scientists far apart from each other. ©

Place of Indian soils in US system of soil classification: Soil Taxonomy proposed by United States Department“of Agriculture has been accepted as official soil classification system for India. While carrying out soil resource mapping programme of the entire country, the soils of India in different states were classified following the Soil Taxonomy. After completion of this project it has been found that 8 soil orders out of the existing 12 have been identified. Maximum area now occur under Inceptisols followed by Entisols, Alfisols, Vertisols and Aridisols. Following the Soil Taxonomy criteria, the entire soil resources of the country were mapped in 1:250,000 scale for most of the states. .

Brief descriptions of the major soil groups in India along with their modern nomenclature, are as follows. .

Alluvial soils: These soils are the largest and most important soil group of India contributing maximum share to its agricultural wealth. These include the soils in the deltaic alluvium, calcareous alluvial soils and the coastal alluvium. In the large alluvial tract of the country, though a great deal of variation exists, the main features of the soils are derived from the deposition laid by the numerous tributaries of the Indus, the Ganges and the Brahmaputra systems. These streams, draining the Himalayas, bring with them the products of weathering of rocks with a wide variety of mineral make up constituting mountains, in various degrees of fineness and deposit them along the course of the rivers. Through the binding of soil grains by the infiltrating silica or calcareous materials, an impervious layer is formed as hard pan in the alluvial soils.

SOILS

Layers of kankar in the Indo-Gangetic alluvium of Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal and also occasionally layers of impure iron oxides are instances of formation of hard- pans.

In the North Eastern States, the Brahmaputra alluvium are, by and large, and poor to medium base soils with slightly acidic to neutral pH. The texture of these soils vary from sandy loam to clay. Their available and total potash contents are fairly good; their P,O, content is good and the percentages of organic matter and nitrogen in them are fairly moderate. The soils of the Surma Valley are fine in texture. The alluvial soils in Tripura, on the other hand, are dominantly acidic, poor base content and clay loam in texture. The organic matter content of these soils also moderate. In West Bengal, covering a part of Murshidabad, Bankura and Midnapur with Bardhawan commonly known as the Rarh region, are composed mainly of the old alluvium. There is hardly any regularity in the manner of deposition of the river-borne materials. Some of the deposits, which had been laid down very early, have naturally been subjected to climatic and other influences, leading to soils which may be different from one another in texture, colour, profile, chemical composition and mechanical and other physical properties.

Depending on soil properties, the alluvial soils of Bihar are grouped into two main divisions, e.g. (a) Northern Gangetic alluvium; and (5) Southern Gangetic alluvium. The northem alluvial soils are calcareous (CaCO, : 0.5-20%); these areas remain flooded for different periods in the year. The soils are sandy loam to clay loam and neutral to alkaline. They are rich in total and available potash, but are deficient in phosphorus. The southern alluvium vary in colour and texture from light-greyish loams to heavy black clays. The middle of the area has a depressed feature, which gets flooded during monsoon and looks like a big lake. The area has been subdivided into: (1) highland, (2) inundated areas, (3) areas with saline soils, and (4) diara land. In Uttar Pradesh, the alluvial soils are divided into three classes, viz. the alluvium of the west and north- west with lighter texture, the alluvium in the central part of the state with texture intermediate between light and heavy, and the alluvium in the north-east developed on a calcareous parent material.

CaCO, and soluble salts vary in these with pH varying from neutral to alkaline. The CaCO, content usually increases at lower depths. These soils are generally poor in phosphorus, nitrogen and organic matter. The alluvial soils developed in the sand- hills alternating with deltaic swamps in coast of Orissa are sandy. Behind this coastal belt is an area of cultivated alluvial and lateritic formations. Soils are both sandy and fine textured; there is sufficient potash but not enough P,O,. In Tamil Nadu, alluvial soils are located in the deltaic areas and along the coastal plains. A section of its profile reveals a deposition of alternate layers of sand and silt, as they are brought in by the rivers. The composition of the strata varies with the nature of the silt brought by the rivers, and in turn, varies with the catchment areas and the tracts through which they flow. The stratified deposition is confined to areas very near the river courses. But away from the rivers, the soils are heavy throughout, the texture ranging from clay loam to clay through silty clay. In such cases, sandy layers occur at very low depths. In Gujarat, the alluvial soils are confined to the northern Gujarat tract, Ahmedabad and Kaira districts and they are locally known as goradu. The soils of Baroda corresponds to the older alluvium, consisting of brown clay with kankar. Those

from the recent depositions are known as bhata. The soils, to a great extent, are of secondary deposition, fairly deep, poor in organic matter and nitrogen, but fairly rich in P,O, and K,O. A large tract of Kathiawar Peninsula (South Gujarat), consisting of Rajkot, Jamnagar, Porbandar areas, is characterized by basaltic alluvium. These soils in the sea coast are saline-sodic in nature.

In Madhya Pradesh, the light-sandy soils found along the Mahanadi basin including Balaghat, Durg, Raipur and Bilaspur, are of alluvial origin. The soils of the Punjab and Haryana plains represent typical Indo-Gangetic Plains. These soils are loam or sandy loam consisting of a soil crust of varying depth. Soluble salts are present in considerable amounts making soil saline. The lower layer contains kankar nodules. Owing to the presence of sodium in the clay complex, the soils are generally alkaline. They are adequately supplied with phosphorus and potash, but are deficient in organic matter and nitrogen. In Kerala, there are two types of alluvial soils on river banks, viz. the coastal alluvium and the alluvium. In central Kerala, the width of the coastal alluvial tracts increases, whereas in the north and south, they are comparatively narrow. The alluvial soils of Kuttanad form a low-lying area, believed to be once a part of the sea and later filled up by silt carried down by the Pampa and other rivers. The coastal alluviums are sandy, having a low water-holding capacity and a low nutrient status. The alluviums on the banks of the rivers are fertile. Taxonomically alluvial soils commonly belong to Entisols and Inceptisols. However, other soil orders like Alfisols, Ultisoils and Vertisols may also be alluvium-derived.

Black soils: The black soils are dark in colour, generally calcareous, low in organic matter, high in clay content, cation exchange capacity and base saturation. They are sticky and plastic and have shrink-swell characteristics. Although relatively homogeneous in morphology, three horizons in these soils are identified in the field. These soils are characterized by the cyclic subsurface horizons of varying thickness with micro-knolls and micro-depressions resulting in a typical micro-relief pattern known as gilgai which grade to a wedge-shaped structural B horizons. Black soils of deep, moderate and shallow types cover an area of about 72.9 million ha (22.2% of the entire country), of which deep black soils constitute 30.0 m ha, moderate 27.2 m ha and shallow 15.7 m ha. A total 33 Benchmark soil series of black soils have been established in the country.

The typical soil derived from the Deccan trap is the regur or black cotton soil. It is common in Maharashtra, western parts of Madhya Pradesh, parts of Andhra Pradesh, parts of Gujarat, and some parts of Tamil Nadu. It is comparable with the ‘chernozems’ of Russia and the ‘prairie soil’ of the cotton-growing states of the United States. It is derived from two types of rocks, the Deccan and the Rajmahal trap and ferruginous gneisses and schists occurring in the Tamil Nadu state under semi-arid conditions. The former attains sometimes considerable depths, whereas the latter are generally shallow. Generally, there is no change in colour up to a thickness of two to three metres. In general black-soils have a high degree of fertility if not saline and/or sodic. These are fine-grained and contain a high proportion of calcium and magnesium carbonates, although noncalcareous black soils are not uncommon. They are exceedingly sticky, when wet. Due to shrinkage on drying, large and deep cracks are formed. These soils contain abundant iron and fairly high quantities of Ca and Mg. Potash has a wide range. They are poor in phosphorus, nitrogen and organic matter.

SOILS

These soils are generally rich in smectitic group of clay minerals. Some of these soils also contain smectite-kaolin interstratified minerals. By and large, these smectites in black soils are chloritized. In Maharashtra, the soils derived from the Deccan trap occupy quite a large area under black soils. On the uplands and slopes, soils are generally shallow to moderately deep and are subject to erosion. There are deep to very deep black soils on the plateau top on the Western Ghats in Maharashtra. On the lowlands and in the valleys, deep and relatively clayey black soils are found. In the valleys of the Tapti, the Narmada, the Godavari and the Krishna rivers, black soils are reported to be very deep. These black soils are, by and large, calcareous, showing high cation exchange capacity with a pH ranging moderately acidic to neutral. Some black soils on the plateau surfaces are noncalcareous.

In Tamil Nadu, the shallow to deep black soils are common and may or may not contain gypsum in their profiles. Soils are fine-textured, have high pH (8.5-9.0) and are rich in CaCO, (57%). They have low permeability and high values of hygroscopic coefficient, pore space, maximum water-holding capacity and specific gravity. Generally black soils have a high base status and a high cation-exchange capacity of 40 to 60 cmol (p+)kg"'. The analysis of clay fractions shows that the iron content varies from 10 to 13% and the SiO,/R,O, ratio varies from 3 to 3.5 with high value of CaO and MgO. The soils are found to be formed from a variety of rocks which include traps, granites and gneisses. In Madhya Pradesh black soils in the Narmada valley are deep to very deep, calcareous, with very well developed slickensides. Many areas of these black soils are now used for soybean cultivation apart from cotton. Some black soils are, however, shallow with murram (weathered basalts) as the subsurface materials. Depending on depth, black soils are classified as shallow, medium and deep. Shallow black soils are Entisols. Medium black soils dominantly belong to Inceptisols while deep black soils are, by and large, Vertisols.

Red soils: These soils of India cover almost all the states, viz. Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Goa, Daman and Diu, south-eastern Maharashtra and eastern Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa and Chhotanagpur. The area of red soils extends into the eastern part of the country including the greater part of the Santhal Parganas (Jharkhand), West Bengal, the Mirzapur, Jhansi and Hamirpur districts (Uttar Pradesh) and many parts of north Bengal and north eastern states comprising of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura and Sikkim. The colour of the red soil is due to the wide diffusion of iron rather than to a high proportion of it. The soils grade from poor thin gravelly and light-coloured varieties of the plains and valleys. They are generally poor in nitrogen, phosphorus and humus. These soils, by and large, occur in sub-humid to humid areas with some exceptions in South India. High rainfall causes leaching of bases making these soils poor in bases. Besides, due to tropical weathering these soils are highly weathered and are therefore dominated by low activity clays. These soils are therefore having low exchange capacity, moisture reserve and nutrient holding capacity.

The clay fraction of the red soils is rich in kaolinitic type of mineral often interstratified with smectite and/or hydroxy interlayered vermiculite. Low pH brings lot of exchangeable Al** ions in the system which form Al-hydroxy cations. These cations are interlayered in the 2:1 vermiculite minerals forming hydroxy interlayered vermiculites (HIV). Such interstratified minerals are common in these acidic red soils.

Red soils have also been found under forest vegetation. Red and yellow soils also occur in close association in the landscape. Their colour is probably due to a higher degree of hydration of the ferric oxide in them than that in the red soils.

The red soils in Tamil Nadu occupy the largest area and constitute nearly two- thirds of the cultivated area of the state. These soils are found from the underlying gneissic or granitic rocks forming shallow, loamy soils with poor bases and low CEC. The pH ranges from 6.6 to 8.0, with low organic matter and plant nutrients. In the eastern tract of Karnataka, the predominant soils are red overlying granitic parent material covering districts of Bangalore, Kolar, Mysore, Tumkur and Mandya. There are shades of red and these shades pass on to yellows. Shimoga, Hassan and Kadur districts are predominantly used for plantation crops under red soils. These soils are rich in potash and phosphorus. They are rich in the total and available K,O and contain sufficient amounts of the total P,O, Between the eastern and western parts of Coorg, well-drained red soils with luxuriant vegetative covers are common. The alluvial soils in the southern part of Bihar are red. The PH of the soils varies from 5 to 6.8. These soils have low P,O, and higher K,O. Red soils are also common in Madhya Pradesh, part of Uttar Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh. Red soils may belong to Entisols, Alfisols and Ultisols. Reported Oxisols are also red in colour.

Laterites: Laterite is a highly weathered material rich in secondary oxides of iron, aluminium, or both. It is nearly void of bases and primary silicates, but it may contain large amounts of quartz and kaolinites. It is either hard or capable of hardening on exposure to wetting and drying. In the past the term “laterite” has been used in many ways, but it is now generally accepted as a name for a material whose composition and properties are within the limits mentioned below.

* Laterites are formed near the earth surface occurring mostly below the soil. They may be either denuded by erosion, or covered by thick forests with the tree roots penetrating several metres deep inside laterite. The chemical and mineralogical compositions and their fabrics are largely determined by their parent rocks.

* Hardness is variable with generally accepted concept of difficulty in breaking even with a hammer when hard.

* Colours are highly variable, mostly reddish, reddish brown and yellowish brown.

Fabric is, by and large, massive.

Chemically the composition varies from 1-60% Fe,O, and < 10% to > 10% (bauxite) Al,O,.

Mineralogically these are gibbsites, goethite, hematite, maghematite, kaolinite and quartz. These kaolinites may be interstratified with smectites. By and large, oxidic minerals and kaolinite dominate. Smectites may also occur. As relicts of the parent rock anatase, titanite (sphene, calcium titanium silicate), tourmaline may be present as accessary minerals.

Well developed laterites have been found on the summits of the hills of Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, the Eastern Ghat regions of Orissa, Maharashtra, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu and Asom. The lateritic soils are very poor in calcium and magnesium and are deficient in nitrogen. P,O, in the form of iron phosphate may be high but K,O is deficient. Higher content of humus may be present in soils with dense vegetation. Laterites also occur at low elevations in the coastal districts of Tanjavur in Tamil

SOILS

Nadu, Nellore in Andhra Pradesh, Midnapore in West Bengal and in other north eastern states like Asom and Tripura. All these soils are acidic. Lateritic soils are generally devoid of bases and do not show properties of cohesion, shrinkage and swelling as observed in black soils. By and large, these soils are poor in nutrient status since these are formed in the humid sub tropical climate with higher rainfall and high summer temperature. They are classified as high level and low level laterites depending on the elevation of the landscape. High level laterites in the states like Maharashtra and Kerala are used for plantation crops. Recent studies indicate that the commonly found laterieic soils on the Western Ghats contain base-rich minerals like zeolites which continuously supply Ca and Mg and can thus maintain the level of base saturation. Low level laterites in Kerala and Konkan districts of Maharashtra and at some places in West Bengal are used for paddy. Laterites, in general, need high level of fertilizer management for optimum crop production. Laterites may belong to Alfisols, Ultisols and Oxisols depending on the degree of weathering and the stage of development of these soils. However, on the eroded surface very shallow laterites are grouped into Entisols.

Capabilities and limitations of each soil group: Traditionally Indian soils are divided into four major groups namely: (1) red, (2) black, (3) alluvial, and (4) laterite. Based on depth, clay content and other soil parameters, a variety of soil types within these soil groups are available. The land surface in the country of 329 mha is predominantly covered with red soils (105.5 mha), black soils (73.5 mha), alluvial soils (58.4 mha), laterite soils (11.7 mha), desert soils (30 mha) and hills and tarai soils (26.8 mha).

Indo-Gangetic (IGP) support 330 million people of the subcontinent have attracted attention of soil scientists for long. For over a century a good part of these lands has been brought under irrigation from the various canals of the Indus, Ganges and the Jamuna rivers. Concomitant with irrigation, certain harmful conditions have developed over these areas, particularly those relative to salinity and alkalinity. Recently an intensive soil inventorisation has enabled identifying 40 soil series in the Indo-Gangetic Plains. Red soils which occur in the Peninsular region have been developed from granite and granite-gneiss. These soils are, by and large, well drained and support plantation crops and many horticultural crops besides, the common agricultural crops. The black soils in India occur mostly in central, western and part of southern India. These soils are characterized by typical morphological features called slickensides which are caused by shrink-swell mineral present in soil namely smectites. These are difficult to plough during rainy season or due to irrigation and require special type of management for effective crop output. These are traditionally known as black cotton soils since cotton is the dominant crop here. Besides cotton, other crops such as soybean, sugarcane, a host of vegetable crops and many other cereal crops are also grown in these soils. In the western Maharashtra and in part of southern India, sugarcane is grown profitably in black soils. The laterites common in many parts of the country are traditionally poor soils because of low base saturation and low capacity of these soils to retain nutrients. Most of these soils, also referred to as red ferruginous soils are geographically located in high rainfall areas which further degrade these soils in terms of soil erosion as well as nutrition depletion. Most of the desert soils located in western part of the country are sandy soils and are prone to wind erosion. Adverse climatic conditions added with

218 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

poor soil quality are the major limitations for agriculture and other land use activities in this part of the country. Recent introduction of irrigation in this part of the country has, however, opened a new horizon for improving agricultural practices in this desert area. The hills and tarai soils of India located mostly in northern and north-eastern part of the country are characterized by cooler temperature and higher rainfall which help developing a high C status for these soils that improve soil physical and chemical properties. Many of these areas have very high potential for horticultural crops.

Soil resources and crop productivity in different agro-ecosystems and agro- ecological sub-regions of the country: From the point of view of soils, India can be called a land of paradoxes. A girdle of high mountains, snow fields, glaciers and high altitude forests in the north; and seas washing both sides of her lengthy coast-line in the Peninsular south; variety of geological formations; diversified climate, topography and relief give India a variety of dissimilar physiographic areas. Its lofty mountains are the highest in the world and its river deltas are raised only a few centimetres above the sea level. Temperature varies from arctic cold to equatorial hot and rainfall from aridity with barely few cm of precipitation to perhumid with world’s maximum rainfall of several hundred cm per annum. Such varied natural environments have resulted in a great variety of soils compared to any other country of similar size in the world. It is no wonder that with such a setting for soil formation, the early Indian soil scientists, located in different parts of the country, were attracted to a systematic study of soil genesis and classification.

A large variety of soils is spread over this sub-continent since they are derived from a wide range of geological materials. The agricultural sector in India, as in many developing countries, continues to occupy the centre-stage of the country’s overall economic growth and development. The role of agriculture, covering crops, animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries, in generating broad-based economic growth is evident from the fact that this sector contributes nearly 1/3 to the gross domestic product (GDP). Human exploitation of these soils traces back to over 40 or 50 centuries and in spite of this long period, these soils have remained productive and capable of sustaining the millions who now inhabit the vast country. Knowledge about the kind of soils and the extent of their occurrence are of importance, more than ever before, for those who are involved in planning optimum use of this resource for maximizing production to meet the ever increasing needs.

Agro-ecosystem concept: For realization of agricultural research and development goals on a long term basis, it is essential to use the natural resources more judiciously. Keeping this in view, the country has been divided into 20 agro-eco regions (AERs) and 60 agro-eco-sub regions (AESR) using the criteria of soils, physiography, bio- climate (climate, crops and vegetation) and the duration of the growing period. While categorization indicates homogeneity of the regions for their growth potential, it fails to reflect socio-economic endowments, market support and service sector in agricultural development. In reality, spatial distribution of production possibility determines spatial diversity of farming systems even within the same AER/AESR. Moreover, introduction of irrigation alleviates a major constraint for crop production and in fact provides opportunities for diversification of agriculture. Although country could be broadly delineated into irrigated and rainfed ecologies for providing required focus on the area-specific developmental needs of region, research and technology dissemination

SOILS

centres around five agro-ecosystems, namely irrigated, coastal, arid, rainfed, and hill and mountainous. The soil resources vary in these ecosystems in terms of soil reaction, base saturation, nutrient holding capacity organic matter content and in terms of length of growing period (LGP) to support a host of agricultural and horticultural crops. In the following paragraphs the description of typical soil and their properties in the Agro-eco systems is given.

agro-ecosystem and its soil resources: The hot and cold arid eco-regions occupy an area of nearly 62 million ha (approximately 19% of the total geographical area of the country). The major production constraints along with low precipitation and high potential evapotranspiration-transpiration (PET) relate to physical and chemical properties of the soils. These soils are thirsty as well as hungry. Land degradation is mainly due to biotic pressure which is widespread in the region. The states falling in the arid region account for nearly 46% of the 107.9 million ha of degraded lands in the country. Arid ecosystem regions have high water deficits and erratic rainfall. Droughts marked by long, dry spells are common to these regions. Farmers are reluctant to use chemical fertilizers and other costly inputs, thus crop yields are low and oscillating. Many of the agricultural operations, including crop establishments and fertilizer use, can be optimally linked to weather forecasts. There is an urgent need for technological initiatives for dove-tailing agronomic and crop management practices with medium range weather forecasts. The soils found in the arid ecosystem covers north-western states like Rajasthan and Haryana, which fall between the Indus river in the west and the Aravalli mountains in the east. These soils are commonly referred to as desert soils. The soils are low in organic carbon content, with generally higher pH and calcium carbonate content. Some soils contain high percentage of salts in the lower horizons while in some areas near Bikaner; they contain appreciable amounts of gypsum. Table 7.14 shows few important properties of a representative soil.

Hill and mountainous ecosystem and its soil resources: The area mountain production regime will essentially cover North Western Himalayan (NWH) and North Eastern Himalayan (NEU) regions of India. The climate of the North Western Himalayan region ranges from hot and sub-humid tropical in the southern low tracts to temperate cold alpine and cold arid in the northern high mountains. While the cold desert of Ladakh in the state of Jammu and Kashmir experiences an annual rainfall as low as 8 cm (cold desert), an annual precipitation to the tune of 350 cm is recorded in certain parts of Himachal Pradesh. The climatic variations, sloping land, small holdings and absence of irrigation make hill farming uncertain and seasonal field crops are largely unsustainable with productivity at a subsistence level. The North Eastern Himalayan region (area of 27.5 million ha, constituting 8.36% of the Indian sub- continent) experiences high rainfall, generally ranging between 300 and 1200 cm, of which 70-90% is experienced between April to October. Denudation of forest vegetation covering vast tract in the hills of NEH has attained an alarming magnitude and is causing recurring floods in the valleys. Adoption of alternate land use systems with perennial horticultural crops and livestock as major components could make hill farming in the NEH sustainable and profitable. The soils are formed either on steep hills in the mountainous high elevation in the Himalayas and are formed from a variety of parent materjals like sand stones, grey micaceous sand stones and shales. The surface horizons of the commonly found hill soils are dark brown, loam to clay loam and rich

in organic matter. These soils lack free lime and have acidic pH. A representative hill soil properties is shown in Table 7.14.

Coastal ecosystem and its soil resources: India has 8,129 km long coastline. The Arabian Sea bound its Peninsular region on the west, the Bay of Bengal on the east and Indian Ocean to its south. It has two distinct major island ecosystems, the Andaman and Nicobar Islands in the Bay of Bengal and the Lakshadweep Islands in the Arabian Sea. Over 3 million ha of India’s coastal area is plagued by salinity (I-45 dS/m). Sea level rise due to global warming has been predicted time and again. The implications of this phenomenon to coastal zone and island ecosystem can well be imagined. Over and above, the natural causes like cyclones, currents and tides are a common feature of these areas. Anthropogenic pressure, unfavourable environmental changes are also taking place. The soil resources in the coastal plains vary a lot. Depending on the physiographic positions these soils may vary in landforms (from sandy to clay), depth, DH (as low as 3.5 for acid sulphate soils) and other physical properties. Depending on the variations of soils in eastern and western coasts the soils can be grouped in many types (Table 7.15). Physical and chemical properties of a representative soil is in Table 7.14.

SOILS

Irrigated ecosystem and its soil resources: The impact of the green revolution was most evident in the irrigated areas, where the existing irrigation systems could be exploited and advantage could be taken of the increased yield potential of the new varieties of crops. This production system has played, and will continue to play, a crucial role in fulfilling India’s demand for foodgrains. Collectively, irrigated agriculture accounts for 37% of the country’s arable land and provides 55 % of the total agricultural production. The irrigated ecosystem will have an anthropogenic influence on various soil properties. Over exploitation of irrigation water along with injudicious use of heavy doses of fertilizers lead to salinity and sodicity problem rendering the soils unproductive. The properties of a representative soil is given in Table 7.14.

Rainfed ecosystem and its soil resources: Out of 142 million ha of the net sown area in the country, unirrigated, rainfed agriculture is practised in over 90 million ha. Nearly 67 million ha of rainfed area falls in the mean annual precipitation range of 500-1500 mm. Productivity and stability in rainfed areas is low. Consequently, although rainfed agriculture occupies about 63% of the total cropped area, it contributes only 45% of the country’s agricultural production. Major rainfed crops grown in India comprise coarse grains, particularly pearl-millet and sorghum, pulses, oilseeds and cotton. Not only are yields of these crops low (average yields of coarse grains being just about 880 kg/ha), but the technology transfer gap is also very wide. The region is characterized by erratic and often low rainfall, degraded and low soil fertility and harsh temperature regimes. A typical soil selected from the rainfed ecosystem is shown in Table 7.14.

Soil degradation: Soil degradation is defined as “a process which lowers the current and/or the potential capability of soil to produce (quantitatively and/or qualitatively) goods or services”. Soil degradation is not necessarily continuous. It may take place over a relatively short period between two states of ecological equilibrium. Soil degradation has also been defined as “the decline in soil quality caused through its misuse by humans”. It is a broad term; however, it refers to decline in productivity through adverse changes in nutrient status and soil organic matter, structural attributes, and concentrations of electrolytes and toxic chemicals. In other words, it refers to a

diminution of the soil’s current and/or potential capability to produce quantitative or qualitative goods or services as a result of one or more degradative processes. Soil degradation, according to the GLASOD definition is “a process that describes human- induced phenomena which lower the current and/or future capability of the soil to support human life”. Soil degradation has been defined in many ways, most often referring to (the agro) productive function of the soil. Ina general sense, soil degradation could be described as the deterioration of soil quality or in other words the partial or entire loss of one or more functions of the soil.

Another terminology is used as degraded or wastelands which have been defined by various Ministries and Planning Commission, in different ways. The committee constituted by the Planning Commission, India in 1987 has defined wasteland as “Degraded land which can be brought under vegetative cover with reasonable effort and which is currently under-utilized land and is deteriorating for lack of appropriate water and soil management or on account of natural causes. Wastelands can result from inherent/imposed disabilities such as by location, environment, chemical and physical properties of soil or financial or management constraints”. Soil degradation is an outcome of depletive human activities and their interaction with natural environments. Processes of soil degradation are the mechanisms responsible for the decline in soil quality. There are three principal types of degradation: physical, chemical and biological.

The soil degradation map of India indicates that an area of about 187 m ha, representing almost 57% of the total geographical area of the country has been affected by various land degradation problems, induced largely by human-intervention (Table 7.16). Water erosion is the major problem causing loss of top soil and/or terrain deformation in about 148 m ha (representing 45%) of the total area throughout the country. Wind erosion is dominant in the western regions, covering 13.5 m ha (representing 4.1%) of the total area. It causes loss of top soil in 1.9%, terrain deformation in 1.2% and over blowing and shifting of sand dune in 0.5% of the affected area.

The influence of human induced chemical deterioration is observed in 13.6 m ha (representing 4.1% of the total area), causing salinization in 10.1 m ha and loss of nutrients and/or organic matter in 3.7 m ha. Waterlogging and/or areas affected by submergence or flooding cover about 11.6 m ha. The land not fit for agriculture (wastelands) including active dunes, salt flats, rock outcrops, ice caps etc. covers almost 18.2 m ha. An estimated area of 32.2 m ha (representing 9.8% of the total area of the country) supporting dense forest, is considered under stable terrain where human- induced degradation problems are relatively insignificant.

Amelioration of degraded soils: In India, reclamation of degraded soils in terms of their salinity and sodicity problems was practised much before any scientific knowledge on the nature and properties of these soils became actually available. The methods to be adopted for reclamation have necessarily to be based upon a proper understanding of the causative factors which lead to the development of the saline and alkali conditions in the soil. For any reclamation technique to be permanent, the following three essential requirements have to be met. They are (i) salt or alkali must be completely removed from the root zone; (ii) the land must be prevented from reverting to original condition; and (iii) the repair of the damage, already done to the soil, should be substantial.

SOILS

SI: 5-10 tonnes of soil loss/yr/ha

Harmful salts being soluble can be removed by leaching with water which is the chief vehicle of their transport, but in many cases the exchangeable sodium in the soil has to be replaced by calcium, for which a calcareous amendment or some other technique may be necessary before the leaching process can be made effective. A prerequisite to these operations involves checking the drainage capacity of the soils. In situations where irrigation with saline water is the cause of salinity, such use has to be stopped or modified suitably. Thus depending upon the local conditions, a combination of techniques is usually required to achieve a permanent solution of the salinity or alkali problem in soils.

PRINCIPLES UNDERLYING THE PROCESS OF AMELIORATION: To determine what type of reclamation procedure will suit a particular kind of soil, it is necessary to know the principles underlying various methods that are employed to reclaim saline and alkali soils. Broadly, the methods can be grouped as: (i) physical and hydro-technical amelioration; (ii) biological amelioration; and (iii) chemical amelioration. Techniques underlying the operational aspects of these methods are described below:

Physical amelioration. Mechanical treatments are at times employed initially to improve physical nature of saline-alkali soils. These can be: deep, ploughing, sub- soiling, sand filling and profile inversion. The first three techniques improve water

224 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

infiltration. Opening of the land and breaking up the hard encrusted surface soils, with or without upturning sub-soils, is only possible through mechanical means. Sub-soiling consists of breaking hard (at times with clay) pan, or compact cemented subsoil layers, through the use of chisels drawn by powerful tractors, provided the pan lies within 40 cm to 100 cm of the surface. Sand filling or ‘sanding’ is done to improve water and air permeability. This can be done either by spreading a layer of sand and ploughing it up with the top layer, or by digging holes down to pierce hard subsoil and filling these holes with sand. The process of profile inversion, has been employed in the USSR in areas where salty surface layer rests on horizons containing gypsum.

After the suitable mechanical treatment of the soil and using good quality irrigation water, leaching and drainage, constitute the hydro-technical parts of the method. At places, even rainwater can be employed for leaching purposes. Excess soluble salts can only be washed down the root zone through leaching; and drained out of the profile through adequate drainage. Usually, leaching and drainage are an essential part of all methods of reclamation, whether chemical, biological or physical.

Biological amelioration: Addition of organic matter benefits saline and alkali soils principally in two ways; (a) improvement in water infiltration, and (6) release of carbon- dioxide during decomposition. Even growing a crop has biological ameliorative action, since during respiration carbon-dioxide is produced and the plants exert shading effect reducing evaporation and slowing down upward rise of salts from groundwaters. In calcareous soils carbon-dioxide brings in, additionally, the soluble calcium for exchange reaction to replace sodium in the soil exchange complex. Biological activity can be stimulated by simply allowing a grass cover to develop; or through afforestation, or green manuring with suitable crops; or incorporation of crop residues, farmyard manure, pressmud and other organic materials. Since partially composted organic materials release much more carbon-dioxide than thoroughly composted (digested) organic wastes; the former exert more calcium solubilizing action than the latter. :

Chemical ameliortion: Inorganic chemical agents are used to reclaim alkali soils which can supply either directly or indirectly, calcium that can replace exchangeable sodium. These agents can be: (a) soluble calcium salts such as calcium chloride or gypsum; (b) slowly and (c) acidifying materials (for solubilizing insoluble native calcium) like sulphur, iron sulphate, iron pyrites, aluminium sulphate, etc; or even sulphuric acid. Of these, gypsum is, by far, the most common and widely used chemical amendment. Limestone should prove useful in acidic waste materials such as phospho- gypsum, fly ash, steel plant rejects, magnesite and gypsum rejects etc. are finding use to some extent, in reclamation of salt-affected soils but their systematic evaluation is necessary before large-scale application is recommended.

In actual practice, reclamation can be made much more effective and speedy, by combining various ameliorative methods, since the interaction between them brings in more spectacular results than when they are applied singly. The synergic effect of the combination of methods is well known and must be taken advantage of in practical soil reclamation projects.

Salt affected soils: Agricultural production in arid and semiarid regions of the world is limited by poor water resources, limited rainfall, and detrimental effects associated with an excess of soluble salts, constrained to a localized area or sometimes extending over the whole of the basin. To minimize vagaries of arid weather and to

SOILS

bring more land under irrigation, and produce and stabilize greater yields per area, numerous water development projects have been commissioned all over the world. Extension of irrigation to the arid regions, however, usually had led to an increase in the area affected by shallow water tables and intensified and expanded the hazards of salinity. This is because irrigation water brings in additional salts and releases immobilized salts in the soil through mineral dissolution and weathering, and losing water volumes through evapotranspiration and concentrating the dissolved salts in soil solution. Fertilizers and decaying organic matter also serves as additional salt sources. Atmospheric salt deposition, though varying with location, may be an important source along the coasts. The relative significance of each source in contributing soluble salts depends on the natural drainage conditions, soil properties, water quality, soil water and agronomic management practice, followed for crop production. Whenever soils have problems of excessive soil moisture as well as natural secondary salinization/ alkalization in the root zone, plant growth is either restricted or entirely prevented. However, high crop productivity in salt-affected soils can be attained if nature and extent of salinity problems are correctly diagnosed and appropriate reclamation and management practices are adopted under favourable environmental conditions for the salt-affected soils, particularly alkali soils. The extent and placement of Indian soils in different types of salt-affected categories are shown in Tables 7.17 and 7.18.

Salt-affected soils differ from arable soils with respect to two important properties, namely the soluble salt and the soil reaction. Any build-up in soluble salt content of soil may influence its behaviour for crop production in several ways through changes in the proportions of exchangeable cations, soil reactions, physical properties of soils, and osmotic and specific ion toxicity effects. These changes have a bearing on the activity of plant root and soil microbes.

Waterlogged soils: The main and associated anthropogenic and natural factors causing waterlogging are: (i) transmission losses from main and branch canals and distributaries, (ii) faulty on-farm water management; (i) lack of natural drainage (flat terrain on inland basin with radial centripetal drainage pattern); (iv) upheaval in the river bed/bed of drainage channel; (v) indiscriminate cultivation in bed of drainage

Group

* arid regions

humid region

channels and putting of fishing barriers; (vi) interception of natural drainage due to construction of roads and embankments; (vii) discharge of surplus canal water into channels with inadequate capacity or in inland basins lacking drainage outlet; (viii) non-utilization of ground water; (ix) inundations by marine and delta cycles; and (x) inundations in coastal areas during cyclonic storms.

In an earlier estimate the extent of waterlogged soils in India was reported to be 1 million. The available information on physical soil degradation in terms of waterlogging in each state indicate that 5.7 million ha area of the country covering about 2 percent of the total geographical area is under waterlogging (Table 7.19). Waterlogging results in restriction of the normal circulation of air. The depth to water-table which is considered harmful depends upon the crop, type of soil and the quality of water. This depth may vary over a wide range from surface for rice to about 1.5 m for other crops. Of the total waterlogged area of 6 million ha, 3.4 million ha are subject to surface flooding in different states. Remedial measures used are: (a) drainage, either surface or sub-surface or both to remove surplus water, (d) lining of canals to prevent seepage and rise of water-table, and (c) sinking tubewell and utilizing water for irrigation thereby lowering water-table. Waterlogged lands contiguous to the sea-coast may be ameliorated for crop cultivation or used for fish culture. Prevention of waterlogging and secondary salinization in the command areas of irrigation projects is as important as the need for erosion-control measures in the catchment areas. Thus, owing to injudicious soils and water management many irrigated areas are producing hardly one-half to one-third of what is otherwise possible. This can be augmented by proper water management.

Management of waterlogged areas: In West Bengal, special types of waterlogged conditions are seen in Malda division, where beel areas pose serious problem of afforestation. The lands here are fertile with Gangetic alluvial deposit, but most of the areas are low-lying, a good part of which except for the bottom portions, remain completely dry for about eight months, whereas during the monsoon and soon after (i.e. mid-July to mid-October) these areas remain totally submerged by the discharge of the rivers and accumulation of run off from the surrounding catchment. These areas are locally known as beel and may be up to 5 km wide and 10 km in length. The depth of water may be up to 5 m. Almost nothing grows there except tall grasses. The first and most important operation is to stub out all tufts of tall grasses from the plantation area. This is important from two angles, firstly to reduce competition and secondly to save the area from fire hazards during summer. Similar beels are common in the north-

SOILS

eastern states including Brahmaputra valley of Assam, and in the states of Manipur, Tripura and Arunachal Pradesh. These areas can also be managed similarly. Planting of all plants in the waterlogged area is done on mounds of suitable dimensions so that they can escape complete submergence during rainy season. In saline areas it is necessary to use good borrowed earth for making mounds. It is beneficial to apply fertilizers along with planting. In areas where the water dries up after rains, it is observed that termites attack the seedlings of many species. Therefore, application of insecticides etc. along with the planting and also later is recommended.

Waterlogging is also caused as a result of canal irrigation in areas adjoining agricultural lands, where subsoil water-table steadily rises. Such conditions are mostly met with in Punjab and Haryana. Waterlogging conditions are also caused in depressions along roads, canals and rail sides during rainy seasons. Some waterlogged areas in low-lying depressions contain high amount of salts. The climatic conditions range from low rainfall with high temperature in Punjab and Haryana. to high rainfall with moderate temperature in some of the southern and eastern States. Traditionally waterlogged areas are used for paddy cultivation. In some areas which are subject to flooding in Asom, West Bengal the tall indigenous varieties are still grown. These varieties have a unique property of tallness and remain always above the waterlevel. The harvest is done by boat. Many waterlogged areas in West Bengal are used for mixed farming, viz. paddy and fish culture.

SOIL MANAGEMENT

It has been stated that the resources of Asia particularly the south Asian countries will continue to deteriorate mainly due to increasing population. India is second largest in

the world in terms of population and will face problems in feeding this ever increasing population. Experts have envisaged higher level of food production to meet this challenge. Although several suggestions in terms of high-yielding varieties of crops have been introduced and are still forthcoming, the fact remains that a proper soil management is must for successful and sustainable crop performance.

Successful soil management for its proper use in terms of agricultural and non- agricultural planning requires not only the knowledge of physical, chemical and biological properties of soils but also the knowledge of climate, geomorphic positions of the landscape and its present land use. So far as agricultural planning is concerned for proper sustainable farming, the knowledge of soils as well as the knowledge of crops is necessary.

Soil management depends on the nature of soils, climatic set-up and the geomorphic positions on which the soils occur on the landscape. The quality of soils which governs soil structure and other soil physical conditions determine soil tilth which is essential for various agricultural operations. The second most important factor is the choice of crops and their rotation under a set of climatic conditions. Since crop requirements in terms of moisture, nutrition and other factors like aeration vary, it is important to find out the exact soil match for successful crop performance. There are different methods to find out soil-crop suitability after knowing crop requirements and setting limits for different properties of soils. It is always possible to identify a piece of land with a specific soil type for their suitability for arable farming. As soon as the soils are found suitable for agricultural practices it is possible to select a specific group of crops which will be most suitable for these soils.

As has been mentioned soil properties vary from place to place. The soils with salinity, sodicity and other associated problems like annual waterlogging will require a complete set of management procedures for their uses. The corrective measures for soil amoelioration for saline and alkali soils are available which have been successfully utilized for restoring soil productivity. For waterlogged areas in many eastern and north eastern states local varieties of paddy have been evolved so that these soils can also be utilized properly. For a successful land use planning at some places in eastern India and also in a few selected areas in the northern part of the country, fisheries and duckeries have been attempted either independently or mixed with paddy crop.

Aluminium toxicity has been found to be a major factor limiting plant growth on acid soils which constitute a major part of the total geographical areas of the country. Improved techniques are available to manage these acid soils in two ways. Firstly judicious liming has been found beneficial for improving soil qualities in terms of physical and chemical properties which ultimately help in better crop yield. Secondly it has been found that a wide range of crop species including agricultural, horticultural and plantation crops can survive even in acidic soil pH condition.

Soil management differs in irrigated and un-irrigated conditions. Assured irrigation facility itself can be an appropriate management technique for boosting up crop production in arid and semi-arid tracks of the country which covers more than 50% area.

As has been mentioned earlier with the help of land capability, classification technique it is possible to identify areas under wastelands, degraded lands, and also those lands which can be utilized for non-agricultural uses. Successful management

SOILS

of natural resources of soil in terms of crop production for non-agricultural uses is ultimately governed by the economics of the management practices selected. Of late the carrying capacity of soils in terms of its utilization has gained importance. Several studies have been made to quantify capacity of soils with respect to different crops individually and collectively.

Maintaining quality of soil resource: This by ameliorating degraded land and increasing organic matter content is imperative for sustaining agricultural productivity. Soil organic matter is probably the most important indicator of soil quality; and that an increase in per cent organic matter content is suggestive of positive change in soil quality reducing soil erosion by increasing water-stable aggregates. Farmers’ alternative cropping practices, such as green manures which are often reported to improve in soil tilth. Some of the new land-use systems have disregarded the time tested, highly effective system of crop rotation as well as the practice of green manuring. Experimental evidences of growing green manure crop (Sesbania sp.) before paddy transplantation, do suggest a better yield even without the addition of fertilizers, apart from its positive effects on soil tilth and pore space. Although microbial life of the soil is often considered as a key element of soil health or quality, more research data are needed to evaluate economic potential of new options and their impact on the soil resource.

The impact of soil degradation processes are not limited to national boundaries. There are evidences to show that the land degradation processes such as loss of organic matter and increase in carbon-dioxide contents are contributing to global changes affecting adversely humanity at large. This will warrant efforts to combat soil degradation not only at the national level but also at the international level. Similar concern has recently been raised while estimating stock of soil organic carbon (SOC) in black cotton soils of India, in different physiographic regions of India, soil organic matter status of various soils in India, the total soil carbon stock of the Indo-Gangetic Plains of India, and the formation of secondary carbonates in Indian soils.

Soil testing, fertilizer and soil health recommendation: The most important step for soil management is to know the soil health which indicates productivity level of a soil for a given crop under a set of conditions. Soil health is judged by soil physical, chemical and biological properties.

Since soil testing depends on soil samples to be analyzed, it is important that the soil samples should be properly collected and documented neatly in the laboratory. Every individual sample should be labelled unambiguously with its field number; and all unidentifiable samples should be discarded. Information regarding the samples should be entered in ledger and each sample given a laboratory number. It is more convenient to use laboratory numbers rather than field numbers. If the analyst himself collects the samples, then adequate field notes may be indicated in the ledger for future reference. Once the samples have been received and recorded, the first consideration is the urgency to decide the required analyses of the whole lot or perhaps one particular determination (eg. pH).

Some of the most important factors which determine soil sampling are depth of sampling, the number of sub-sampling within a plot, the size of the area, the season of the year, the frequency of sampling and above all the purpose of soil sampling. By and large, the soil samples are collected from the plough layer from which plants draw most of the nutritional requirements. The soil samples collected from different corners

of a plot are mixed thoroughly and spread on a clean sheet of paper to divide it into 4 equal parts. Two opposite quarters are rejected while the samples from the other two are mixed and the process is repeated till a sizable amount of sample (500 g) is obtained. The samples are collected in a plastic bag and again wrapped in.a cloth bag. Moist samples are dried before packing and storing in the laboratory for future use. For soil testing purpose the following informations are also collected during soil sampling. These are sample number, date of sample, name of the cultivator, village/taluka/district/ state, type of soil (red soils, black soils, alluvial soils indicating nature of problems if any for example salinity, sodicity) field or survey number, land use (standing crop, crop rotation, level of management in terms of fertilizers, pesticides and organic manures applied, crop variety) depth of soil samples collected, other features of the samples and sampling area in terms of slope percentage, surface stoniness, gravels, drainage, permeability etc., and number of samples taken to make the composite sample. Soil testing: Standard methods are used for analyzing samples for soil testing. The soils are tested for, pH or the soil reaction indicating acidity or alkalinity of the soil, total soluble salts as indicated by electrical conductivity values to show the degree of salinity, organic carbon which gives an indirect measure of available nitrogen, and other available nutrients, viz. phosphorus, potassium and other selective micronutrients. Besides, other items for analyzing soil parameters may be undertaken. Based on these analyses the soils are classified into categories as shown in Table 7.20.

Under the All India Coordinated Research Project on Soil-Test-Crop response Correlation of ICAR, a new methodology has been developed for soil-test-based fertilizer recommendation for obtaining specific yield targets of crops. The needed parameters to be experimentally obtained for a given soil type, crop, agroclimatic condition for formulating fertilizer recommendation for targeted yield are: (1) nutrient requirement in kg per quintal of produce (grain or other economic part), (2) the per cent contribution from soil available nutrients to total uptake, and (3) the per cent contribution from the applied fertilizer nutrient to total uptake. Based on a large number of field experiments conducted at different soil agroclimatic conditions, soil test calibrations and ready reckoners for fertilizer recommendation have been prepared for use by the soil testing laboratories (Table 7.21).

Targeted yield equations

FN= 5.07 T — 0.34 SN; FP,O, = 4.03 T — 1.65 SP; FK,O = 3.20 T — 0.24 SK

The importance of micro-nutrients for the overall crop production has long been recognised in India. Several states like Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh and Bihar have been found deficient with respect to one or more micro- nutrient(s), With the introduction of high-yielding varieties of rice, wheat, maize,

SOILS

prescriptions for targeted yields of rice (Tellahamsa) for varying soll test value of black soils of Hyderabad

nee for kharif rice grown in black soils under well and tank irrigations in Telengana region

Source: All-India Coordinated Soil Testing- Crop Response Project (ICAR)

sorghum and many other pulses soils gradually got depleted with respect to micro- nutrients. As a result there is a growing requirement for external application of micro- nutrients in the soil to replenish the losses due to heavy intake of nutrients from the soil by these high-yielding varieties. Knowledge of the micronutrient status of soils is,therefore the first step to have an idea for external application of micronutrients. The critical values for sulphur and micronutrients (zinc, manganese and copper) are given in (Table 7.22).

Soil acidity has a correlation with the availability of nutrients in terms of their deficiency and toxicity. By and large, a soil having pH < 6 is considered as acidic. Besides, the electrical conductivity values of the saturation extract (ECe) of soils have been found to be quite helpful in judging salinity level. It has been found that ECe value of < 1.0 dS/m is normal, while values ranging up to 2.0 dS/m is critical for germination of seeds. The study indicates that ECe 2.0-4.0 dS/m is critical for growth of all the sensitive crops, while a value above 4.0 dS/m causes injury to most crops. Although soil testing values give a fair amount of idea about the existing nutrient

status, it should be kept in mind that the status of a particular nutrient element per se cannot perhaps indicate the performance of a host of crops. Since different crops have different levels of nutrient requirements it becomes imperative to judge soil productivity in terms of choice of a particular crop. It is in this respect, soil test values vis-a-vis the choice of crop will be a more appropriate approach for recommending different levels of management for a particular group of soils.

BETTER USE OF NUTRIENT SOURCES: The best use of nutrients for crop growth can be obtained on the basis of a high soil fertility level. Soil fertility is a complex term which include many components: soil depth, texture and structure (pore space for supply of oxygen and water), soil reaction, organic matter content and composition, activity of soil organisms, nutrient content, and absence of detrimental or toxic substances. The result of an optimum combination of these factors is high soil fertility, which means a high crop production potential. For the practical use of soil nutrients, the basic problem is the estimation of the amount that will be available during the growing season (in order to fill the remaining gap with additional nutrients). The main diagnostic method is soil testing for available nutrients, and most countries have their soil testing system calibrated for special areas. Whereas the analytical methods are rather precise, due to the heterogeneity of most soils, the diagnosis can only provide an approximate estimate. Nevertheless, it is possible to draw useful conclusions on the necessity of additional nutrients. For more precise information, systems of plant analysis have been developed.

Unfortunately, most soils are far from being ideally fertile and should therefore be improved, not only by adding nutrients, but also by other soil amendments, e.g. lime for correcting strong soil acidity, organic matter for maintaining the activity of “soil life”. The qualitative importance of organic matter for soil fertility is rather well known, but many quantitative aspects are still to be solved. The main functions of soil organic matter are physical soil improvement (increase in water and air capacity, protection against erosion) and several chemical functions (increase of sorption capacity, mobilization of nutrients by mineralization of organic matter and from minerals, short term immobilization into soil organisms (which thus compete with crop for N), long- term fixation into stable humic substances (e.g., improvement of quality via C/N ratio), and supply of beneficial organic substances (growth promoters and antibiotics). The importance of soil organic matter differs in different climatic regions, the role of nutrient source often being a dominant one. It should not be decreased, but maintained at an acceptable level, above critical values corresponding to structural stability and biological activity. In rainfed tropical agriculture, soil organic matter is the corner- stone for the building of any sustainable annual cropping systems. It has recently been indicated that organic carbon content of a few selected forest soils (Alfisols of eastern India) sharply declined when put to cultivation. This reduction was found significant even within 5 to 15 years of cultivation. For all these soils, irrespective of their initial carbon levels, there is a tendency of soil organic matter to reach some quassi- equilibrium values of 1-2%. On the basis of this critical limit of OC in soils, as well as that of mollic epipedon mollisols the critical level of organic carbon in soils has been fixed as 1%. This limit indicates that nearly 70% area in the country is deficient in soil carbon.

Two major purposes for soil information could be to understand the functioning of

SOILS

the natural world and to use this knowledge for human welfare. The existence of soil science as a branch of science rests on the recognition of soil as a distinct entity, with specific properties, functions and methods to study. Soil properties governed by biological, physical and chemical processes are integrated within the soil and expressed in terms of its productive properties. Among many issues, the most important concern raised during the 16" World Congress of Soil Science is that “soil science has been brilliantly influenced by reductionist physics and chemistry, poorly informed by biology and the more holistic sciences of ecology and geography, and largely uninformed by the social sciences”. The soil has been visualized as the engine of the earth. Therefore, at the beginning of the 21" century when the earth is threatened by human activity, the cure for many human induced problems must lie in appropriate stewardship of the soil. The soil has to be managed within the overall framework of the biosphere, of which soil is an integral part. The future efforts of soil management, therefore, call for integration of a host of scientific disciplines, directly or indirectly involved in the studies of the natural resources.

As a part of social awareness about the importance of soil—its use and misuse, the soil related curricula in the school has been found as a good topic. Through formal education, the concepts of soils in the field of biology, chemistry, physics, mathematics and ecology may be introduced and applied. This could be an excellent example to “conservation ethics of soils” in terms of this invaluable natural resource. With the advent of modern day information technologies, the soil education in the modified course curricula can be excellently facilitated by the recent advances in computer generated graphics.

There is evidence that the atmospheric composition of the globe is being significantly changed by human intervention resulting in an accelerating accumulation of greenhouse gases such as CO,, CH, and N,O with consequent effects on global climate. Terrestrial organic carbon represents only about 5% of the global total, of which about 75% (1570 Pg) is estimated to be in the soil. Soils and climate have always been closely related. Possible rises in global temperature during this century and the consequent possible alterations in rainfall patterns are expected to have substantial impact on both soils and human demographics. Thus it is feared that the conversion of land to agriculture, especially in the humid tropics, is an important human activity that may contribute to greenhouse gas emission.

Food security remains a persistent and ever growing problem for a large portion of the world’s population. It has an immediate consequence on soil in terms of the adoption of survival strategies by poor farmers in view of declined productivity, soil losses and land degradation. The global environmental problems such as land degradation and desertification, loss of biological diversity and climate change will dominate the overall objective of soil studies in the next century. The soils, like oceans and the atmospheres are the most essential resources for sustained quality of human life and other related activities. Soil resources, the foundation of agricultural development are part of the renewable resources on which our nation must build and grow to fulfill all cherished dreams. Therefore, we need to pledge ourselves to care for the universal substrate, i.e. the Mother Earth.