SOURCE_DOCUMENT: Chapter 38.pdf

38. Indigenous Technical Knowledge in Agriculture

The advent of the concept of sustainable agriculture in late eighties in Indian agricultural scenario has evoked interest on indigenous technical knowledge (ITK) that has the element of use of natural product to solve the problems pertaining to agriculture and allied activities. Indian farmers, over centuries, have learnt to grow food and to survive in difficult environments, where the rich tradition of ITK has been interwoven with the agricultural practices followed by them.

The concept of sustainable agriculture in Indian agricultural scenario has aroused interest in ITKs. These ITKs are based on experiences which gathered momentum through generations and are being developed and improved through informal experimentation. Thus, ITKs are based on the experiences, tested in most cases over centuries, and endowed with best adaptability to local environment. These are dynamic, holistic, eco-friendly and sustainable; and interwoven, and assimilated in the cultural life of the people. The enhancement of the quality of life of the Indians who in great majority live in and depend on agricultural production systems would be impossible by keeping this rich tradition of ITK aside. The use of term ‘tindigenous' began at the institute of Development Studies (IDS), University of Sussex, UK, in 1979. A special issue of the IDS Bulletin featured the term "indigenous technical knowledge", and it was followed by the publication of Indigenous Knowledge Systems and Development (Brokensha, Warren).

* Local in that it is rooted in a particular community and situated within broader cultural traditions; it is a set of experiences generated by people living is those communities. Separating the technical from the non-technical, the rational from the non-rational could be problematic. Therefore, when transferred to other places, there is a potential risk of dislocating indigenous knowledge.

* Tacit knowledge and therefore, not easily codifiable.

* Transmitted orally, or through imitation and demonstration. Codifying it may lead to the loss of some of its properties.

Experential rather than theoretical knowledge. Experience and trial and error, testing in the rigorous laboratory of survival of local communities constantly reinforce indigenous knowledge.

* Learned through repetition, which is a defining characteristic of tradition even when new knowledge is added. Repetition aids in the retention and reinforcement of indigenous knowledge.

* Constantly changing, being produced as well as reproduced, discovered as well as lost; though it is often perceived by external observers as being somewhat Static.

The term indigenous knowledge (IK) refers to the unique, traditional, local knowledge existing within and developed around the specific conditions of women and men indigenous to a particular geographic area (Gremier, Louise 1998). Indigenous knowledge is the local knowledge - knowledge that is unique to a given culture or

1419 INDIGENOUS TECHNICAL KNOWLEDGE IN AGRICULTURE

society. IK contrasts with the international knowledge system generated by universities, research institutions and private firms. It is the basis for local - level decision in agriculture, health care, food preparation, education, natural resource management, and a host of their activities in rural communities (Warren, 1991). Indigenous knowledge is the information base for a society, which facilitates communication and decision - making. Indigenous information systems are dynamic, and are continually influenced by internal creativity and experimentation as well as by contact with external systems.

The term indigenous technical knowledge is often camouflaged with the belief that is associated with forthcoming happenings and the innovations made by the farmers to solve specific problems. Some of the related terms are as follows:

Indigenous knowledge (IK)- is the participants' knowledge of their temporal and social space. Indigenous knowledge as such refers not only to knowledge of indigenous people, but also to that of any other defined community.

Indigenous knowledge system (IKS)- delineates a cognitive structure in which theories and perceptions of nature and culture are conceptualized. Thus it includes definitions, classifications and concepts of the physical, natural, social, and economic environments. The dynamics of IKS take place on two different levels, the cognitive and the empirical. On the empirical level, IKS are visible in institutions, artifacts and technologies.

Indigenous technical knowledge (ITK)- is specifically concerned with actual application of the thinking of the local people in various operations of agriculture and allied areas.

Belief change in behaviour of insects, animals and vegetation indicating a forthcoming event without any scientific rational but could be true in happening.

Innovation- outside the arena of ITK, but scientifically-based development of practices using the locally available resources to solve specific problems.

Taboo- A strong social norm prohibiting certain actions that are punishable by the group or community, by the supernatural or by magical consequence. The punishment members of rural social systems. follows as endorsed by the

Differences between traditional knowledge system and western scientific system are as follows:

Human life is generally regarded as superior, with a moral right to control other life forms.

All parts of the natural world are regarded as animate, all life forms as interdependent.

Knowledge is transmitted largely through the written word. Knowledge is generally learnt in a situation, which is remote from its applied context.

Knowledge is transmitted largely through oral media. Knowledge is developed and acquired through observation and practical experience.

Knowledge is essentially reductionist, quantitative, analytical and theoretical. Knowledge is generated largely by specialist researchers on a synchronic (short term) time scale.

Knowledge is holistic, intuitive, qualitative and practical. Knowledge is generated by resource users in a diachronic (long term) time scale.

Since information on ITK are seldom documented, it often happens that such information are lost, if not passed on from generation to generation or protected and practiced by the local people. Hence, in today's concept of IPR regime, it is all the more imperative to document and protect our valuable ITK for posterity. In the context of agricultural sustainability, ITK is also required to be properly documented for the benefit of researchers, planners and development officials. Validation of ITK is a logical step to qualify and quantity effectiveness of the practices.

Suitable modifications of the local practices through research and development will help to develop appropriate and acceptable technologies that are suited to our farming situations.

Recognizing indigenous knowledge

Sharing indigenous knowledge on a global scale by development agencies such as the World Bank's Indigenous Knowledge for Development Program (World Bank, 2002) and UNESCO's 'Best Practices of Indigenous Knowledge' (UNESCO, 2002) database. Meanwhile, national and multinational corporations have taken indigenous knowledge as a valuable commodity and are sharing the knowledge in the commercial world for profit.

Indigenous knowledge resource centres

There are 37 indigenous knowledge resource centres across the world with 16 in Africa, 8 in Asia, 5 in Europe, 4 in Latin America, 1 in Middle east and 3 in North America. In India Centre for Advanced Research on Indigenous Knowledge Systems, Mysore; Centre for Indigenous Knowledge on Indian Bioresources, Lucknow; and Centre for Indigenous Knowledge of Indian Herbal Resources (Central Institute of Medical and Aromatic Plants). Lucknow, are the prominent ones.

Sources of indigenous technical knowledge

The sources of ITK are as follows.

1. Farmers and the community members especially elders are the best sources of ITK. But, since ITK is unevenly distributed in communities, it is important to

1421

INDIGENOUS TECHNICAL KNOWLEDGE IN AGRICULTURE

find out who knows what in order to tap the right sources, otherwise, data will not truly reflect the ITK in the community. For example, asking men about garden plants when women are in charge of home-gardens might lead to a conclusion that villagers know little about gardening.

2. Folk-lore, songs, poetry and theatre can reveal a great deal about people's values, history and practices. These are often not written down and need to be recorded.

3. Community records: Although ITK is mostly transmitted by word of mouth, some indigenous forms of record keeping do exist. These include writings, paintings and carvings, and many other forms.

4. People working with communities such as extensionists can be a valuable source of ITK. Other resource persons are local school headmaster, credit co-operative society officials, village milk co-operative members, men and women labourers, and village Panchayat Sarpanch.

5. Secondary sources include published and unpublished documents, databases, videos, photographs, museums and exhibits.

Documentation of ITK has to be systematic so that the information collected can be properly documented, giving the names and addresses of the users of the ITK, location and use of the ITK, details of the practices of the ITKs etc. Such information are useful for documenting the ITKs appropriately and to identify the locations where the practices are in use, and also to give due credit to inventors and users of the technologies. A detailed exercise has been made for documenting ITKs in different themes under the Mission Mode National Agricultural Technology Project on Collection, Documentation and Validation of Indigenous Technical Knowledge during 2001. The same have been published as Hand-out Guidelines and Format for Obtaining Information on Indigenous Technical Knowledge (2001). The themes covered include rain-water management, soil and water conservation, wind erosion, tillage practices, crops and cropping systems, pest and disease management, soil fertility management, farm implements, post-harvest technology, grain or seed storage, horticultural crops, veterinary and animal husbandry, fishery, ethno-botany and agro-biodiversity, weather forecasting, fuel management, thermal efficiency, waste water management, garbage disposal and management, food-product development, natural yarns, dyes and weaves, low-cost housing material and ethnic food.

Collection, documentation and validation of indigenous technical knowledge

Keeping in view the importance of indigenous technical knowledge in Indian agricultural scenario, as indicated earlier, a mission mode national agricultural technology project on collection, documentation and validation of indigenous technical knowledge (ITK) was sanctioned by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research during 2000 to 2004. Information on ITK has been collected from the primary sources through voluntary disclosure. Simultaneously efforts were made to collect and compile the practices on ITK from the available literature, books, journals, thesis etc. so as to make them accessible at one place. The project has brought out the following documents in this direction:

* Inventory of Indigenous Technical Knowledge in Agriculture Document | (2002)

* Inventory of Indigenous Technical Knowledge in Agriculture Document 2 (2003)

1422 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

* Inventory of Indigenous Technical Knowledge in Agriculture Document 2 (supplements 1 and 2 ) (2003)

These four volumes contained an inventory of 4,880 ITKs covering 23 thematic areas as mentioned earlier giving the details of the ITKs, names and addresses of the disclosers, location where the ITKs are in practice, estimated efficiency of the ITKs etc. Digest of some ITKs on different themes has also been published (Handbook of Agriculture 2006).

Validation of ITKs is an important aspect which has remained almost untouched from research agenda. In this direction 111 ITKs were validated experimentally covering 14 thematic areas, viz. rain water management, soil and water conservation, tillage practices, crops and cropping systems, pest and disease management, farm implements, seed storage, horticulture, veterinary science and animal husbandry, fisheries, food product development, natural yarns and dyes, ethnic food and thermal efficiency, and case studies in two thematic areas, viz., methods of weather forecasting and low- cost housing materials. In deciding the ITKs for taking up for validation a systematic effort was made to classify and prioritise the ITKs based on parameters namely, severity of problems, prevention of maximum losses, innovativeness, easy to handle, availability of related inputs, extent of use indigenous knowledge base, rationality, eco- friendliness and cost- effectiveness.

For prioritization of ITKs, the method used including the parameters and weighted scores to quantity the importance of ITKs are as follows:

For calculating the overall importance index (I), the following formula was used:

where, Xi is the score out of 10 on each parameter.

cross-sectoral validation across the country. The findings of the validation, indicating the names of the experimenters, location and methodology of studies, and effectiveness of the ITKs with results and related discussion have been published in the following two documents :

* Validation of Indigenous Technical Knowledge in Agriculture Document 3 (2004)

* Cross-sectoral Validation of Indigenous Technical Knowledge in Agriculture Document 4 (2004).

Different plant and animal-based materials in ITKs

Different plant and animal-based materials have been in use in indigenous technologies. These materials include cow urine, cowdung, ash, bael, castor oil, mustard oil, neem, mint, curd, asafoetida, turmeric, methi etc (Table 38.1).

INDIGENOUS TECHNICAL KNOWLEDGE’IN AGRICULTURE

Control of insects in mustard Control of root feeders and pests Used as insecticide Cutworm attack in maize

1424

(Table 38. 1 continued)

Castor oil

Used for preventing shedding of cotton bolls

Crops cropping Pest and disease management Grain/seed storage Horticultural crops

Control of white fly in cotton

storage- pest control in pegionpea

Quality improvement of vegetables Management of banana cracks

Animal health care

Control of intestinal parasites

Calotropis gigantia

Pest and disease management

Used for termite control Used for insect-pest control in rice Used to prevent attack of thrips in paddy nursery Control of caterpillar in cotton

Kerosene oil

Used for termite control Used for control of ants in climbers Control of earhead bug or stem borer in rice Control of wilt in chickpea Control of insects in cotton of suckers in

Pest and disease management

Checking sprouting of suckers in banana

Horticultural crops

Neem

Neem cake is used for termite control Neem oil or neem cake used for control of early stem|borer in rice | Neem leaves in paddy nursery or seedling treat ment to control pests and diseases

Pest and disease management

(Contd...)

INDIGENOUS TECHNICAL KNOWLEDGE IN AGRICULTURE

1426 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

(Table 38.1 concluded)

Animal health care

Tulsi

Healing of FMD lesions

Blast in rice

Control of fruit fly in sapota

1427

Use of plant-material in animal- health care

Different plant-origin materials are being used in indigenous practices for treatment of the animals for various aliments (Table 38.2).

A large number of plant species are used in crop production, plant protection and post-harvest operations besides, production system in animal husbandry, fishery, household food and nutrition management etc. (Tables 38.1 and 38.2). Keeping in view the need for development of appropriate technology by the scientists and its diffusion by the change agents, the knowledge on various aspects of the plant species including their habitats, characteristics and active ingredients is of paramount importance for its further use. Geographical indications is one of the laws of protecting intellectual properties right. In this context, geographical indications of 228 plant species covering the thematic areas of pest and disease management, grain/ seed storage, horticultural crops, veterinary science and animal husbandry, fishery, ethno-botany and agro-biodiversity have been brought out in one document (Geographical Indications of Plant Species in ITKs in Agriculture Document 5, 2004).

1428 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

Placement of publications in libraries of ICAR institutes, Agricultural Universities and World Bank was also made.

ITK practices have been developed by the practicing farmers based on their keen observations, informal experimentation, experience sharing and modifications, wherever necessary over the years. Perhaps the grasses and foliage which are not eaten by animals were first identified believing that these plant materials contain chemicals that have insecticidal properties (Honey Bee 2007). It can be seen from Table 38.2 that none of the plant materials used for protection of crops and used as veterinary medicine in ITKs are grazing or fodder materials. Results of the validation substantiate such hypothesis.

One hundred and eleven ITKs were selected for experimental validation across the country under the MM NATP on Collection, Documentation and Validation of ITKs. The experiments were conducted by a team of scientists drawn from ICAR institutes and state agricultural/veterinary universities. The initial results of the studies were published during 2004 in the from of a book (Validation of Indigenous Technical Knowledge in Agriculture Document 3). From these, 38 ITKs were further taken up for cross-sectoral validation through experimentation, the results of which have been published again in 2004. (Cross-sectoral Validation of Indigenous Technical Knowledge in Agriculture - Document 4). In depth studies were conducted under controlled and field conditions with efforts to identify the active compound(s) present in the materials which are responsible to make the ITKs efficacious. Further support was taken from

Gandhi bug population was re- The active principle present in the Control of insect pests in - lowland rice using parasi duced by both application of leaves of C. collinus is oduvin, a yel- lowish white crystalline glucoside. (Cleistanthus collinus) leaf fresh leaves and planting of twigs of parasi.

Wild sugarcane helped in multipli- Planting of wild sugarcane was Planting of wild sugarcane cation of different types of spiders found effective in controlling (Saccharum spontaneum) that controlled case worm. the infestation of rice case in paddy field for controlling leaf/folder worm.

Control of case worm in rice by application of leaves of parasi (Cleistanthus collinus) and sali (Beswellia yerrata)

Sali tree, on injury, exudes an oleo- gum-resin known as Indian olibanum. The gum is credited with astringent, stimulant, expectorant, diuretic, diaphoretic, emmena-

(Contd...)

1429

INDIGENOUS TECHNICAL KNOWLEDGE IN AGRICULTURE

(Table 38.3 continued)

gogue, ecbolic and antiseptic prop- erties.

Control of gallfly in rice by use of parasi or persu (Cleistanthus collinus) leaves Application of parasi leaves was effective in reducing the damage in rice caused by gallfly. The active principle present in the leaves of C, collinus /s oduvin, a yellowish white crystalline gluco- side.

Pest management in to- mato by using leaf extract of Cynodon dactylon The ITK reduced incidence of wilt, leaf curl and early blight in tomato to some extent, in ad- dition to reducing fruit-borer in- cidence. A decoction of C.dactylon is diuretic and is considered useful in dropsy and anasarca. The express juice is astringent .

Use of kochila (Strychnos nux-vomica) mixed cowdung compost for con- trolling fruit and shoot borer in brinjal Use of kochila - mixed cowdung compost increased mortality of fruit and shoot borer, thereby reducing the in- cidence of these borers in brinjal. Strychmine and brucine are the most important and strongly toxic alkaloids present in S. nux-vomica.

Cattle urine, specially of cow con- tains, besides others phenol, paracresol, catechol, orcinol, halo- genated phenol and 2,5 - phenyl phenol which are known to be antibacteial, antifungal and antibi- otic that work as insecticide.

Cattle urine, specially of cow con- tains besides others phenol, paracresol, catechol, orcinol, halo- genated phenol and 2.5 - phenyl phenol which are known to be an- tibacterial, antifungal and antibiotic that work as insecticide.

Sprouting in yam by cowdung slurry Application of fresh cowdung to the cut tubers induced early sprouting. Results of the study indicated that early sprouting is due to contents (Contd. . .)

1430

(Table 38.3 continued)

of nutrients and organic matter and presence of bacteria and actinomy- cetes in cowdung. The microflora present in cowdung reduced phe- nol content in the tuber that is toxic for sprouting.

Factors that favoured enhanced yield and yield parameters due to bending include higher content of lipid, trypt-ophan, protein; and higher polyphenol oxidase activity, peroxidase activity and catalase activity in leaves and bark with re- duced content of chlorophyll and ascorbic acid in fruits even though the total soluble sugar content in- creased in the fruits.

The juice of banana pseudostem was found to be rich in zinc, cop- per, calcium, iron, magnesium, manganese and phosphate that helped to increase pH and hard- ness of the pond water, precipitat- ing the suspended matter and thereby reduced the turbidity of pond water. Plankton production was increased due to better pen- etration of sunlight through the water.

The efficacy of the ITK may be at- tributable to the presence of, as determined by photochemical test- ing, flavonoids, alkaloids, steroids and other triterpenoids, fixed oils and fats, tannins and phenolic com- pounds in peach leaves.

Use of bael (Aegle marmelos) to check diar- thoea in animals Oral administration of bael powder hastened the recovery in calves suffering from E. coli diarrhoea. The bae/ powder also showed mild anthelminite effects and was useful in para- sitic diarrhoea as well. The active ingredient study re- vealed the presence of alkaloids, tannis, flavonoids, saponons and triterpenes which may be respon- sible for ameliorative potential of bael in diarrhoea.

Control of diarrhoea in cat- tle and buffalo by using paste of shisham It was found that shisham leaf paste enhanced the recovery in E. coli diarrhoea. The amel- Although in-vitro testing revealed no anti-bacterial activity in acquous extract of shisham leaves, the pres-

(Contd...)

1431

INDIGENOUS TECHNICAL KNOWLEDGE IN AGRICULTURE

(Table 38.3 concluded)

the publications on Wealth of India and other literature to identity the compounds present in plant materials which are used in ITKs. These information have been published in 2004 in Geographical Indications of Plant Species in ITKs in Agriculture Document 5. Some of the examples of the results obtained are presented in Table 38.3 wherein the active ingredients have been identified and other reasonings have been placed.

Results of the experimental validation conducted to determine the efficacy of ITKS in different thematic areas of agriculture and land-based activities indicate clearly the wisdom of the traditional practices. The determined efficacy of the ITKs makes a point on the need to develop conjunctive management system, incorporating components of ITK and scientific knowledge which will minimize use of chemicals in agricultural production systems and will meet the requirements of developing eco- friendly technologies for sustainable agriculture. Further, integration of ITK and scientific knowledge will develop technologies which would be more need-based, better problem-solving, locally applicable, easily acceptable, ecologically friendly, and more intelligible, creditable and convincing to the farmers.

Agricultural production is an outcome of process of application of science and technology, development and management of technology and building knowledge system among the farmers to facilitate application of technology. However, the indigenous knowledge that is in use over generations has not found appropriate place in development of agricultural technology. Neither it has been focused in the syllabus

1432

meant for graduate/post- graduate students in agriculture.

ITK in agricultural education

Agricultural education plays an important role in the socio-economic development of the country. Agricultural education in India has an orientation towards facilitating the modern/improved methods of farming without giving adequate attention to the traditional and indigenous methods of farming and value addition. The emphasis has been on acquiring knowledge, awareness creation and dissemination of new technologies through extension and communication techniques. Therefore, it is imperative that the agricultural education should enable the agricultural sector to harness and use the resources and other inputs efficiently to convert the dimension of comparative weakness into advantage through quality improvement and cost minimization in which indigenous knowledge can play a great role. Integration of ITK with agricultural education will also help the students of agriculture to know the wisdom of traditional knowledge. The possible ways to achieve the goal are:

* Inclusion of ITK in university under-graduate course curriculum.

* Asking RAWE students to collect ITKs during their camps and work experience programmes in the villages.

* Inclusion of one exemplary model of ITK so that the students understand the methodology of collection, documentation and validation of ITKs during the RAWE programme.

Providing opportunities to the students to analyze and compare the ITKs with those of corresponding modern technologies in all the disciplines according to the thematic areas.

* Understanding IPR issues of ITKs and methodology of patenting.

ITK in agricultural research

Agricultural research has to address the following:

* Evaluation of efficacy of ITKs by conducting trials under controlled, field, and on- farm conditions, including identification of active ingredients present in materials which are used in ITKs.

+ Integration of ITKs with scientific information and evaluation of treatment effect.

* Conducting on-farm research for development of technology modules

* Encouraging post-graduate and doctorate students to take up dissertation/ thesis work on ITK in their respective disciplines.

ITK in agricultural extension

; ; The following steps are suggested to popularize ITKs through agricultural extension mechanism:

+ Human resource development by conducting long-duration training programmes on collection, documentation and validation of ITKs for in-service personnel.

* Mobilizing resources for collection and documentation of ITKs.

+ Dissemination of information on ITKs through print and electronic media.

* Inclusion of the topic on ITK in the foundation course for the agricultural scientists of National Agricultural Research System.

INDIGENOUS TECHNICAL KNOWLEDGE IN AGRICULTURE

Indigenous knowledge in organic and sustainable agriculture

fertilizers and pesticides. Organic production systems are based on specific and precise standards of productions, which aim at achieving optional agro-eco systems that are socially, ecologically and economically sustainable. Organic agriculture is holistic production management system which promotes and enhances agro-eco system health, Organic agriculture is one among the broad spectrum of methodologies that support environment. It aims to minimize the use of external inputs, avoiding the use of synthetic

Organic production systems are governed by a set of standards to be followed strictly by the producers of organic food. These standards have been developed by different countries. India has come up with its organic standards for agriculture and animal husbandry based on international Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements (IFOAM) minimum standard guidelines. Organic agriculture emphasizes on the use of management practices in preference to the use of off- farm inputs, taking into account that regional conditions require locally adapted systems (FAO/WHO Codex Alimentatrius Commission. 1999). ITK - based practices offer its potential to accomplish organic agriculture where biological methods are adopted for farming, keeping away the off- farm inputs. Non-Government Organizations, private sector and public sector like Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA) under Ministry of Commerce and ndustry, Government of India (GOI) are making concerted efforts to boost organic production in India, particularly for export. One of the major steps taken by GOI is launching of National Programme for Organic Production (NPOP) in April 2000 which was approved on 2 May 2001, and development of Indian Standards for organic production to guide organic producers in India.

ITK- based practices will also help to furthering the concept of biodynamics and natural farming where the soil-health-building process is left to the nature, as the inputs for ITK are drawn from the products of soil and are returned to the soil in the form of compost or manure or soil and plant health-protecting agents.

Issues relating to intellectual property right (IPR)

Intellectual property is the science and technology information generated by human intellect as well as the ideas and material developed by such process that have tangible value for scientific advancement and public goods and are reproducible at different locations. Like the rights on the movable and immovable property, intellectual property can also be protected. Intellectual property relates to the information that can be incorporated in tangible objects and reproduced in different locations. The IPR concerns with the subject "technology", which is not tangible. The ITK-based technologies, used in animal husbandry and plant protection involve specific knowledge of plant- origin products that are locally available. The practices are used by large number of farmers for a long time. The scope of IPR is thus relevant to the practices, particularly when the biological materials are used for specific purposes.

Knowledge in science and technology is being increasingly examined for its potential to create wealth. Only knowledge that is protected or protectable can have the potential of wealth creation. A new IPR regime has been ushered in with the coming into force of General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and the establishment of World Trade Organization (WTO). Inclusion of IPR in the form of trade-related intellectual

1434

property (TRIPS) in the GATT agreement is the consequence of this paradigm shift in the capitalist market economics. The system of IPR, i-e., patents, designs, trademarks and copyright, which provides legal rights to the ownership of new ideas, also encourages wide sharing and commercial transaction of the new knowledge. Like the movable and immovable property, intellectual property is also governed by the law of the country, for the time being in force, viz. Law of Intellectual Property Rights.

Besides the farmers and rural people, the grassroot democratic institution such as Panchayat is the actual custodian of traditional knowledge. Rural setting being the domain of exercise of farmers' rights, the role that Panchayat can play in establishing farmers right on indigenous knowledge is immense. To protect the intellectual insight of the traditional knowledge, the Convention of Biological Diversity (CBD) urges the need to secure prior informed consent and involvement of custodians of traditional knowledge and varieties prior to their access and use by others either for commercial purposes or establishing new IPRs based on the traditional knowledge or varieties. All the principles of CBD are incorporated in two Acts- (i) the Biological Diversity Act, 2002, and (ii) Protection of plant Varieties and Farmers' Rights Act 2001.The Biological Diversity Act, 2002 was enacted by Government of India to ensure enquitable sharing of the benefits arising from the commercial use of biological and associated knowledge resources involving administrative machinery at national, state and Panchayat levels to monitor, regulate and approve access and sustainable use of biodiversity and to promote its conservation. The protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers' Rights Act, 2001 was enacted by government of India to establish an effective system of protection of plant varieties, the right of farmers arising from their contribution in conserving, improving and making available plant genetic resources to develop new plant varieties, and plant breeders. This Act, thus, safeguards farmers' right on plant varieties, simultaneously allowing plant breeders' right (Bala Ravi, S. 2004. Manual on Farmers' Rights. M.S. Swaminathan Research

Initiatives for protection of indigenous knowledge

* Legal scholars, anthropologists and native scholars are now proposing new legal regimes designed to defend indigenous cultures by radically expanding the norm of copyright.

* The US Patent and Trademark Office is studying a variety of issues surrounding trademark protection for the official insignia of federally and / or State recognized Native American Tribes.

* Center for Indigenous knowledge for Agriculture and Rural Development (CIKARD) has been closely involved with a growing global network of indigenous- knowledge resource centers—these centers provide the mechanisms for protecting indigenous knowledge.

* International initiatives such as the WIPO (World Intellectual Property Organization) are set to serve as a powerful tool to aid examiners in patent and trademark offices across the world to assess the state of current traditional knowledge.

WIPO is engaged in:

* Developing information, training and standards on intellectual property to document traditional knowledge.

1435

INDIGENOUS TECHNICAL KNOWLEDGE IN AGRICULTURE

Studying cases in which the protection of traditional knowledge has been sought under the intellectual property system.

Conducting feasibility studies on applying customary laws to traditional knowledge.

Implementing a pilot project on acquiring, managing and enforcing intellectual property rights for traditional knowledge.

Certain non-IPR Mechanisms of Traditional Knowledge Protection

. Environmental: Concluded in 1994, the UN Convention to Combat Desertification provided for the protection of traditional knowledge in the ecological environments as well as the sharing of benefits arising from any commercial utilization of TK.

° Health: The World Health Organization has recognized the relevance of TK in the field of medicine as a source of primary health care in the Primary Health Care Declaration of Alma Ata.

° Trade and development: The Doha Declaration adopted by the World Trade Organization in the Doha Ministerial Conference, in 2001, instructed the TRIPS Council to examine issues regarding the protection of traditional knowledge.

• Food and agriculture: The International treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and agriculture provides for the recognition of farmers' rights and the protection of traditional knowledge relevant to plant genetic resources for food and agriculture.

Access and benefits-sharing

The salient features of access and benefits sharing of ITKs include in following:

The governing body of Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) has now • agreed to guidelines on access and benefit sharing as a guide to countries when drafting national legislation.

• Criteria for patentability should include the proof of prior informed consent or mutually agreed terms for benefit-sharing.

• India: Section 10 (Contents of specification) of the patents Act 1970 as amended by the patents second amendment Act, 2002 provides that the applicant must disclose the source and geographical origin of any biological material deposited in lieu of a description.

Section 25 ( opposition to grant in patent) as amended allows for opposition to be filed on the ground that "the complete specification does not disclose or wrongly mentions the source or geographical origin of biological material used for the invention".

• Costa Rica: Biodiversity Law 7788 Article 80 (Obliged prior consultation) includes providing the certificate of origin issued by the Technical Office of the Commission for the management of Biodiversity and the prior informed consent.

Europe: Recital 27 of Directive 98/44 on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions provides that the patent application should where appropriate, include information on the geographical origin of biological material, if known. But this is entirely voluntary.

1436 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

• All countries should provide in their legislation for the obligatory disclosure of information in the patent application of the geographical source of genetic resources from which the invention is derived. This issue should be considered by the Council for TRIPS.

• Consideration should be given to establish a system whereby patent offices examining patent applications while identifying the geographical source of genetic resources or traditional knowledge pass on that information, either to the country concerned, or to WIPO which may act as a depository for patent related information on alleged "biopiracy." Through these measures it will be possible to monitor more closely the use and misuse of genetic resources.

Taking cue from the controversial patent cases involving traditional knowledge and genetic resources (patent no. 5,401,504 on use of turmeric in wound healing and European patent no. 0436257 for controlling fungi on plants by the aid of a hydrophobic extracted neem oil) there is a need for creation of digital libraries of traditional knowledge to facilitate minimum search documentation lists of patent offices during the process of patent applications.

• Lao People's Democratic Republic established Traditional Medicines Resource Centre (TRMC) which is working with local healers to document details of all traditional medicines with a view to promoting a sharing of practices within Laos. The TRMC is also collaborating with the International Co-operative Biodiversity Group (ICBG) in efforts to discover prospective medicinal products. Any benefits, profits or royalties realized from plants knowledge recovered during the collaboration will be shared with all the communities involved.

• After successful Indian challenges of the turmeric and basmati, it was agreed that Indian National Institute of Science Communication (NISCOM) and the department of Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy (ISM&H) would collaborate to establish a Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL) with Traditional Knowledge Resource Classification (TKRC) based on International Patent Classification System (IPC), about 5000 subgroups.

• Work on such libraries is also being pursued in WIPO where a specialized Task Force including representatives from China, India, the USPTO and the EPO are examining how such libraries can be integrated into the existing search tools used by patent offices.

• Maintaining multilateral registrar of geographical indications is another system which would constitute a basis for eligibility for protection as done in case of basmati due to the unique and complex combination of environment, soil, climate, agricultural practices and the genetics of basmati varieties.

From individual intellectual property rights (IPR) to community intellectual rights (CIR)

Indigenous people are to be described as 'innovators' because the knowledge • they have accumulated has been unknown to the outside world.

• Constitution of a trustee of local community leaders for the whole community as beneficiary (It also refers to FAO Resolution 5/89 on farmer's rights being vested in the international community as trustees for present and future generations of farmers).

1437

INDIGENOUS TECHNICAL KNOWLEDGE IN AGRICULTURE

* Creation of a community registry of invention in which a community might register its innovations as a simple method of declaring their existence to the world. The idea is similar to copyright law and the mechanism is more flexible than filing a patent. Failure to register does not surrender the innovation rights, but doing so may block a patent application for an identical or similar innovation.

* Developing a community register documenting all known plant and animal species with full details of their uses. Community members would then be in a position to refuse access to the register or set conditions under which access would be allowed.

Information system for ITK

Indigenous technical knowledge is being used by the farming community of India for various activities related to agriculture and allied aspects. Documentation of ITK

1438

has remained scanty and the practices in precise had remained with the practicing farmers. Consequently, existence of information on ITK is constrained by non- availability of documents. However, documents of ITKs were prepared which have made an attempt to fulfill the requirement in this direction. Accessibility to information on ITK through electronic media is yet another aspect to be dealt with. In this direction, use of MS Access - SQL server, CD writing could be useful to cover the entire gamut of information and screening of component files and sub-component files with appropriate codes, linking of components with sub-components, searching system for information retrieval and CD writing will be helpful. Functioning of such data-based management system will make information accessible to the concerned individual or agencies. Further, development of websites will be a step in this endeavour.

The preceding chapter has given an insight on the concept of ITK and its relevance to agricultural production technologies, methodologies of collecting information on ITK and its documentation, examples of ITKs, efficacy of ITKs, relevance of ITK based practices in organic farming and sustainable agricultural technology production systems and IPR-related issues. The need of incorporating ITK in agricultural education and research as regular course curriculum and further strengthening extension on ITKs by using modem technologies such as ICT and e-choupal has been indicated. The entire gamut of ITK- related aspects has been outlined in Fig. 38.1.

As ITK is a relatively new area of study, capacity building to understand ITKs has been considered to be the first job to be accomplished, followed by collection and documentation of ITKs, conducting research to validate the wisdom of ITKs, supported by data and finally patenting of the relevant ITKs. The need of conducting workshops and training programmes at different steps of activities has also been indicated in the diagramme.