SOURCE_DOCUMENT: Chapter 5.pdf

5. Agrobiodiversity

Biological diversity is the sum total of diversity in the biosphere around earth planet in terms of number, variety and variability of all living organisms. By definition, biodiversity (short form of biological diversity) is termed as the variability among living organisms from all sources, including terrestrial, marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological complexes in which they are part, and this includes diversity within species, between species and that of ecosystems. The diverse biological entities, along with natural resources from air, land and water, provide the basis for life and also the Sustainability and development of societies. Holistically, biodiversity facilitates the processes of renewal of biomass, soil, water and air, free recycling and purification in nature, and also ensures co-existence and cultural balance of hosts of living organisms together with their friends and foes, such as, scavengers, predators, pests and pathogens.

Ever since agriculture and settlement came into existence some 10—12 thousand years ago, the human intervention in nature has given rise to a subset of biodiversity, which became recurrently dependent for further evolution and development on the human activities rather than natural competition. This may be termed as agricultural/ farm biodiversity, including the biodiversity of domesticated plants and animals. Such evolution in agriculture-related species has led to the emergence of distinct manifestations and types as well as their co-adaptations. This further gave rise to diverse agroecological systems and complexes.

Meaning of agrobiodiversity

The subset of biodiversity related to agriculture is known as agrobiodiversity; and is defined as the diversity of the agricultural systems, all agriculture-related species and individuals within species. It includes all flora and fauna, plants, animals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, insects, soil organisms, and other agriculture-related microorganisms, which are associated with food and other agricultural production. These also include the wild related species of the cultivated plants and the domesticated animals as they have the potential to provide donor genetic stocks for various important traits.

Agrobiodiversity is a basis of stability in agricultural production, livelihood of farming households and communities, sustainable development, and resource for further development of improved strains. It also gives farming systems the opportunity and means for nutrient recycling, maintaining equilibrium in the endemic pathogens and pests or providing resilience in abiotic and climatic stress conditions, controlling weeds, and maintaining good soil conditions. A rich agrobiodiversity could provide both socio- economic and ecological benefits and thus it is important to both agriculture and society. Another underlying importance of agrobiodiversity is that it provides genetic resources of actual or potential value for further improvement in agricultural productivity and production.

122 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

ESTIMATES OF BIODIVERSITY

In terms of the existence of species diversity on earth, current estimates vary drastically between 8 and 125 million species. The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) endorses a possible occurrence of around 14 million species. Out of these, only less than 1.75 million species have been described and formally named so far. This includes 0.27 million plant species and 1.32 million animal species (Table 5.1).

Source: Convention on Biological Diversity. On Line: Status and Trends of Global Biodiversity <http://www.cbd.int/gbo1/chap-01.shtml>

India is one of the 17 megadiverse countries. It has highly diverse agroecological habitats, such as coastal, plateau, desert, plains, hills and mountain systems. More than 45,500 plant species (including fungi and lower plants) and nearly 87,000 animal species have been described in the country (Table 5.2), which respectively constitute

Source: Third National Report (India) to CBD <http://www.cbd.int/doc/world/in/in-nr-03-en.doc>

11.8% and 7.25% of the global biodiversity. Endemic Indian biodiversity is also significant; 4,950 species of flowering plants, 16,214 insects, 110 amphibians, 214 reptiles, 69 birds and 38 mammals are endemic to the country.

The wide gap in the number of species estimated to occur and those taxonomically identified (Tables 5.1, 5.2) is attributed to inter alia inadequate availability of institutions and trained taxonomists that can speed up the survey and identification work. The Second National Report (India) to CBD in 2001 had indicated that around 350 taxonomists were available in the country. Out of these, 130 taxonomists covered seed plants, 85 insects, and 76 vertebrates. The number was obviously lower for other categories of living organisms in both plant and animal kingdoms. Only around 70% of the country’s land area has been surveyed so far to describe the species diversity therein. According to estimates, more than 500 years would be still required to discover all biodiversity on earth with the current rate of identification of new taxa and strength of scientific infrastructure.

Biodiversity and agrobiodiversity

Human needs for food, clothing, shelter and other basic amenities may be ideally met from the abundant biodiversity available on the earth planet on a sustainable basis. In the history of agriculture, however, human beings have selectively domesticated several species occurring in nature and provided them with alternative environment under agriculture for succession. The agro-environment is expected to have changed their equilibrium under domestication/farming over the millennia, giving rise to new diversity that is well adapted under these conditions.

The agrobiodiversity is well demonstrated in the traditional agricultural systems where it essentially maintains biodiversity in terms of mixture of crops as well as the variability of other farm related biological organisms and farming systems. It contributes to the system health and sustainability in several ways. For example, it ensures a sustainable harvest from the mixture of crops that may show differential survival under adverse situations or calamities. It provides endemicity and equilibrium for crop health vis-a-vis production. It may also lower soil temperature, protect against erosion, improve soil texture, provide nutrients and organic matter, reduce weed problems, and improve drainage, fertilization, frost control, effect of irrigation, etc. Loss of such diversity in agriculture may deprive humankind from sustainable gains from the system. Study, periodical review and appropriate management of agrobiodiversity are, therefore, of paramount importance.

It is important to observe that agrobiodiversity does not cover crops alone but it has a much wider scope. As already defined, it covers the variety and variability of animal, plant and microbial organisms on earth that are important to food and agriculture. It is an important sub-set of biodiversity as it is the basis of food security. It includes all the species used directly or indirectly for food and agriculture: human Nutrition, feed for domestic animals, and the provision of essential raw materials and Services such as fibre, fertilizer, fuel and pharmaceuticals. It covers, inter alia: crop Varieties, including forage and fodder plants and trees, animal breeds, including fish, Molluscs, bird species and insects, as well as fungi, yeasts and micro-organisms such 4 algae and diverse bacteria.

oe, , . Looking from yet larger perspective, agrobiodiversity includes (7) crop varieties,

livestock breeds, fish species/strains and non-domesticated (wild) resources within field, forest, rangeland and aquatic ecosystems, (i’) non-harvested species within the production ecosystems that support food provision, including soil micro-organisms, pollinators, green manures, biocontrol organisms and so forth, and (iii) non-harvested species in the wider environment that support food production ecosystems (agricultural, pastoral, forest and aquatic), including landraces, wild relatives of crops and livestock, and environmental plants such as windbreaks for soil erosion control.

AGROBIODIVERSITY IN INDIA

India figures among the biodiversity rich countries in the world, having more than 8% of the identified higher plant and animal species on nearly 2.5% of the global land mass. Its cultural, ethnic diversity includes more than 550 tribal communities of 227 ethnic groups, which are spread over 5,000 odd forest villages representing diverse ecosystems across the humid tropics to semi-arid, temperate and alpine regions. In terms of plant species, about 17,500 species of higher plants are estimated to occur in the country in its 16 major vegetation types. About 33% of the species are endemic. Indians have domesticated more than two dozen crop plant species, and some farm animals, particularly the buffalo. There are more than 380 cultivated/semi-cultivated crop species and 130 breeds of domesticated animals and poultry in the country.

Indigenous crops

There are 49 major and minor crops endemic to the country (M.S.Randhawa, History of Agriculture in India, ICAR), including rice, 4 minor millets, 4 pulses, Indian mustard, 9 vegetables, 5 tuber crops, 11 fruits, 5 spices, sugarcane, 7 fibre crops, and Cannabis (medicinal plant). The Centers of Origin sensu Vavilov of Cultivated Plants also list following cultivated plants to have Indian origin: Oryza sativa, Rice; Eleusine coracana, African millet; Cicer arietinum, Chickpea; Phaseolus aconitifolius, Mothbean; Phaseolus calcaratus, Ricebean; Dolichos biflorus, Horsegram; Vigna sinensis, Asparagusbean; Solanum melongena, Eggplant; Raphanus caudatus, Rat’s tail radish; Colocasia antiquorum, Taro yam; Cucumis sativus, Cucumber; Gossypium arboreum, Tree cotton 2x; Corchorus olitorium, Jute; Piper nigrum Pepper; and, Indigofera tinctoria, Indigo.

In addition, the list of ‘Food crops of the world’, published by the World Conservation Monitoring Centre also includes the following crops as having Indian origin: Mangifera indica, Mango; Colocasia esculenta, Taro; Camellia sinensis, Tea, Brassica juncea, Mustardseed; Cucumis sativus, Cucumber; Eleusine coracana, Fingermillet; Oryza sativa (O. nivara), Rice; Cajanus cajan, Pigeonpea; Sesamum orientale, Sesameseed; Piper nigrum, Pepper; Malus pumila, Apple; Prunus communis, Pear; Citrus limon, Lemon; Solanum melongena, Eggplant; and Elettaria cardamomum, Cardamom. It would be prudent to use this information in conjunction with the other pieces available from time to time for making relevant interpretations and conclusions. Crops introduced and naturalized in India

Crops introduced and naturalized

The presently cultivated plants in the country have been derived from two sources, namely (i) indigenous and (ii) introduced. The latter have come from various continents

and countries, namely Western Asia, Africa, China, Southeast Asia and Pacific Islands, the New World and the Europe. The new crops introduced in the country over the past few centuries by Moughals and the Spanish, Portuguese and British voyagers include apple, pear, peach, apricot, grape, almond, datepalm, maize, potato, sweet potato, tomato, beans, onion, garlic, chillies and lentil. In due course, the introduced crop species naturalized and adapted to Indian conditions and farmers’ interventions led to generation of further diversity and traditional knowledge in these crops. Consequently these have become integral part of the Indian agriculture. The Arabs possibly brought with them clove, coriander, cumin and fennel whereas the British occupation led to the introduction of coffee, cocoa, cashew nut, litchi, cinchona, strawberry and blueberry. Tea was introduced from China and rubber and pineapple from Latin America.

The introduced and naturalized species, on being isolated climatically and spatially from their original homes, over time and space, in the vast and diverse Indian agro- eco-habitats, have undergone the process of diversification, which is so obvious. There is now preponderance of variable landrace forms/primitive types belonging to different crop groups such as cereals, millets, legumes, vegetables, fruits, forages, fibres, sugar yielding types, spices, condiments, medicinal and aromatic plants and others grown in the diverse phytogeographical and agroecological regions of the country. Studies have revealed differential concentration of genetic diversity comprising native species and landraces, which was observed to occur more in Western Ghats, northeastern Himalayas, southern plateau, central India and northwestern Himalayas than in other parts.

Diversity in crops

Rich crop diversity is available in India in terms of both between- and within- species variability. Landraces, traditional cultivars and farmers’ varieties in several agri-horticultural plant species are abundant. Reports have indicated that more than 380 crop plants are cultivated in India. Crops in which rich diversity occurs in India include rice, wheat, maize, barley, pigeonpea, chickpea, minor-millets, mungbean, urdbean, horsegram, mothbean, ricebean, clusterbean, sesame, forage grasses, okra, eggplant, cucumber, melons, citrus, banana and plantains, jackfruit, mango, tamarind, jamun, jute, cotton, ginger, turmeric, pepper, cinnamon and cardamom. Among tuberous crops, rich variability exists in sweet potato, ‘aros and yams. Native resources are also available in Coleus species, sword bean, velvet bean and several plantation crops including arecanut and coconut. Diversity also occurs in several minor fruits, such as berries and nuts; and several species of Rubus, Ribes, Juglans, Pyrus and Prunus.

Diversity in other economic plants

Plants have been used in the country for medicinal purposes since ancient times, dating back to the pre Vedic culture, at least 4000 years Bc. It is observed in an All India ethnobotanical survey that the traditional doctors in India have used over 7,500 species and varieties of plants in their practice of local medicine. India is also the centre of domestication and diversification of several forest plant species, forages, grasses, shrubs, herbs, ornaments, etc. There are about 141 endemic genera belonging to over 47 families

of higher plants in the country. The largest numbers of endemic species (about 2,532 species) are located in the Himalaya followed by the peninsular region (1,788 species) and Andaman and Nicobar islands (185 species). India also holds half of the world’s aquatic floral diversity. Further, there is an enormous richness in terms of wild crop plant relatives wherein nearly 325 species have been reported to occur.

Diversity in agroecological regions/systems

Like the richness in terms of between and within species diversity, the country has a rich diversity of the agroecosystems as well. [CAR studies have resulted in the demarcation of 20 distinct agroecological regions in the country, which belong to six broad ecological systems. This zonation is done on the basis of the climates, soil characteristics and average length of growing period of annual crops in their agroecosystems.

Arid ecosystem: average growing length of period less than 90 days: (i) Western Himalaya—cold arid ecoregion with shallow skelatal soils, (i?) Western Plain, Kachchh and part of Kathiawar Peninsula—hot arid ecoregion with desert and saline soils, (iii) Deccan Plateau—hot arid ecoregion with red and black soils;

Semi-arid ecosystem: average length of growing period ranging between 90 and 150 days: (iv) Northern Plain and Central Highlands including Aravallis—hot semi- arid ecoregion with alluvium derived soils, (v) Central (Malwa) highlands, Gujarat Plains and Kathiawar Peninsula—hot semi-arid ecoregion with medium and deep black soils, (vi) Deccan Plateau—hot semi-arid ecoregion with shallow and medium (with inclusion of deep) black soils, (vii) Deccan (Telangana) Plateau and Eastern Ghats— hot semi-arid ecoregion with red and black soils, (vii?) Eastern Ghats, Tamil Nadu uplands and Deccan (Karnataka) Plateau—hot semi-arid ecoregion with red loamy soils;

Sub-humid ecosystem: average length of growing period ranging between 150 and 180 (to 210)+ days: (ix) Northern Plain—hot subhumid (dry) ecoregion with alluvium-derived soils, (x) Central Highlands (Malwa, Bundelkhand and Satputra)— hot subhumid ecoregion with black and red soils, (x?) Eastern Plateau (Chhattisgarh}— hot subhumid ecoregion with red and yellow soils, (xii) Eastern (Chotanagpur) Plateau and Eastern Ghats—hot subhumid ecoregion with red and lateritic soils, (xiii) Eastern Plain—hot subhumid (moist) ecoregion with alluvium-derived soils, (xiv) Western Himalaya—warm subhumid to humid with inclusion of perhumid ecoregion with brown forest and podzolic soils;

Humid perhumid ecosystem: average length of growing period ranging above 210 days: (xv) Bengal and Assam Plain—hot subhumid (moist) to humid (inclusion of perhumid) ecoregion with alluvium-derived soils, (xvi) Eastern Himalaya—warm perhumid ecoregion with brown and red hill soils, (xvii) Northeastern Hills (Purvanchal)—warm perhumid ecoregion with red and lateritic soils;

Coastal ecosystem: (xviii) Eastern Coastal Plain—hot subhumid to semi-arid ecoregion with coastal alluvium-derived soils, and average growing period ranging between 90 and 210+ days, (xix) Western Ghats and Coastal plain—hot humid perhumid ecoregion with red, lateritic and alluvium-derived soils, and average growing period ranging above 210 days.

Island Ecosystem: (xx) Islands of Andaman-Nicobar and Lakshadweep—hot humid

to perhumid island ecoregion with red loamy and sandy soils, and average growing period ranging above 210 days.

INDICATORS OF AGROBIODIVERSITY

The distribution of diversity in the agroecosystems, between species and within species has a direct, system wide relevance. Thus, in a way, the occurrence of diversity of the agroecosystems has led to enhancement of overall agrobiodiversity because of the wide and/or differential adaptation of the same and related species across these agroecosystems, thereby enriching the other components of agrobiodiversity. The archaeological evidences suggest that the agriculture has been practised in India since ancient times (4,000-5,000 years hence). This fact also substantiates that human intervention over a long period has led to development and stabilization of crop diversity in the country. The natural or disturbed occurrence of wild relatives of crop plants in different agro-climatic zones of the country could provide a key indicator in this regard. Further, it may be difficult to substantiate this diversity in the cultivation zones but the traditional agroecosystems, also termed as the ethnic agroecosystems, provide positive indicators.

Archaeological evidence of ancient agriculture

India has a notably long history of agriculture. Archeological evidences have suggested that rice, wheat and barley cultivation was already widespread in India by the year 2000 ac. Overall, archaeological records depict an ancient occurrence of the following crops in the country: Barley, Hordeum; Bajra, Pennisetum; Castor, Ricinus; Date palm, Phoenix; Horsegram, Dolichos; Jowar, Sorghum; Lentils, Lens; Linseed, Linum; Maize, Zea; Melon, Cucurbita; Mung, Phaseolus; Peas, Pisum; Amla, Phyllanthus; Kodo, Paspalum scrobiculatum; Ragi, Eleusine; Rice, Oryza; Sesame, Sesamum; Wheat, Triticum; and Ber, Ziziphus, besides some weed seeds.

The early evidences of pollen are undoubtedly of Neolithic age, dated as 23754120 Bc to 1725+95 Bc from diagrams constructed from Sambhar Lake, Rajasthan. The first encountered cereal type pollen grain of the size ranging 40-50 mm is, however, dated back to 6000 Bc. The Neolithic wheat referred to be Triticum sphaerococcum, was discovered from Chirand district, Sarna, Bihar. It was found much below the depth, and dated by radiocarbon to 1755 sc (TF-1032, 3705155). The charred grains reported as wheat from Kali-bangan, Rajasthan and dated 2090-2075 sc have been found on re-examination to be exclusively that of barley. Archaeo-botanical records also suggested that there was a rice variety in Hastinapur, dated about 500-300 sc. The records from Orissa in eastern India were not dated but may be about 1500-1400 sc in a much more primitive context than those found in the highly evolved late Harappan and Chalcolithic cultures in western India. The earliest records from south India were from the Iron Age IE 870 Bc. Chalcolithic, Iron Age and Early Historical barley records were known from Atranji Khera dated 1200-600 sc and subsequently barley was found at Ter, Osmanabad, Maharashtra around 155 Bc to 160 Bc.

Distribution of wild relatives of crop plants

Cereals and millets: Western Himalayas (7 genera, 15 species): Avena fatua, A. ludoviciana, A. barbata, Aegilops tauschii, Digitaria sanguinalis, Elymus dahuricus,

E. dasystachys, E. nutans, Eremopyrum buonapartis, E. distans, E. orientale, Hordeum spontaneum, H. glaucum, H. turkestanicum, Pennisetum orientale; Eastern Himalayas (1 genus, | species): Hordeum agriocrithon; Northeastern region (4 genera, 6 species): Digitaria cruciata, Coix lacryma-jobi, C. gigantea, C. aquatica, Oryza rufipogon, Polytoca wallichiana; Gangetic plains (3 genera, 3 species): Panicum miliare, Paspalum scrobiculatum, Chionachne koenigii; Western peninsula (6 genera, 7 species): Chionachne koenigii, C. semiteres, Coix gigantea, Oryza coarctata, Panicum psilopodium, Setaria glauca, Trilobachne cookei; Eastern peninsula (2 genera, 5 species): Oryza nivara, O. rufipogon, O. granulata, O. coarctata, Polytoca digitata; Widely distributed (3 genera, 7 species): Eleusine indica, E. compressa, Echinochloa crus-galli, Setaria tomentosa, S. pallide-fusca, S. verticillata, S. viridis.

genera, aphaca, Moghania vestita, Mucuna capitata, Trigonella emodi, Vigna capensis, V. radiata var. sublobata, V. umbellata; Eastern Himalayas (3 genera, 5 species): Moghania vestita, M. bracteata, Vigna capensis, V. umbellata, V. pilosa; Northeastern region (5 genera, 9 species): Afylosia barbata, A. scarabacoides, A. villosa, Canavalia ensiformis, Moghania vestita, Mucuna bracteata, Vigna unbellata, V. radiata vat. sublobata, V. pilosa; Gangetic plains (5 genera, || species): Atylosia mollis, A. platycarpa, A. scarabaeoides, A. villosa, Trigonella corniculata, T. polycerata, T. occulta, Lathyrus aphaca, Vicia sativa, Vigna aconitifolia, V. radiata var. sublobata; Indus plains (4 genera, 5 species): Vigna aconitifolia, V. trilobata, Trigonella occulta, Atylosia scarabaeoides, Lathyrus aphaca; Western peninsula (5 genera, 26 species): Atylosia albicans, A. barbata, A. candollei, A. elongata, A. geminiflora, A. grandifolia, A. kulnensis, A. lineata, A. mollis, A. nivea, A. platycarpa, A. rugosa, A. rostrata, A. scaerabaeoides, A. sericea, A. villosa, Canavalia ensiformis var. virosa, C. obtusifolia, Dolichos uniflorus, D. bracteatus, Mucuna pruriens, Vigna radiata var. sublobata, V. capensis, V-pilosa, V. umbellata, V. dalzelliana, (V. mungo var. sylvestris, V. radiata var. setulosa, V. grandis in north); Eastern peninsula (1 genus, 10 species): Atylosia albicans, A. candollei, A. barbata (southern part), A. cajanifolia, A. geminiflora, A. kulnensis (southern parts), A. mollis, A. rostrata, A. rugosa, A. scarabaeoides; Widely distributed (2 genera, 5 species): Dolichos purpureus-lignosus types, Vigna radiata sublobata, V. capensis, V. trilobata, V. aconitifolia.

Oilseed types: Western Himalayas (1 genus, 4 species): Lepidium capitatum, L. draba, L. latifolium, L. ruderale, Eastern Himalayas (1 genus, | species): Brassica trilocularis types; Northeastern region (1 genus, | species): Brassica trilocularis types; Gangetic plains (4 genera, 5 species): Brassica quadrivalvis types, B. tournfortii, Carthamus oxyactha, Sesamum indicum (naturalized), Lepidium spp. (L. draba); Western peninsula (1 genus, 2 species): Sesamum laciniatum, S. prostratum; Eastern peninsula (1 genus, 1 species): Sesamum prostratum.

Fibre types: Western Himalayas (1 genus, 1 species): Linum perenne; Northeastern region (2 genera, 2 species): Corchorus capsularis, Gossypium arboreum (primitive types); Gangetic plains (2 genera, 3 species): Corchorus trilocularis, C. tridens, Urena repanda; Western peninsula (3 genera, 7 species): Corchorus acutagulus, C. antichorus, C. fascicularis, C. urticaefolus, Crotalaria retusa, C. striata, Linum mysorense; Eastern peninsula (1 genus, | species): Hibiscus cannabinus, Widely occurring (1 genus, | species): Urena lobata.

Fruits: Western Himalayas (9 genera, 24 species): Duchesnea indica, Elaeagnus hortensis, Ficus palmata, Morus spp, Prunus acuminata, P. cerasoides, P. cornuta, P. napaulensis, P. prostrata, P. tomentosa, Pyrus baccata, P. communis, P. kumaoni, P. pashia, Ribes glaciale, R. nigrum, Rubus ellipticus, R. moluccanus, R. fruticosus, R. lasiocarpus, R. lanatus, R. niveus, R. reticulatus, Ziziphus vulgaris; Eastern Himalayas (7 genera, 14 species): Duchesnea indica, Morus spp, Myrica esculenta, Prunus acuminata, P. cerasoides, P. cornuta, P. jenkinsii, P. napaulensis, Pyrus pashia, Ribes glaciale, Rubus lineatus, R. ellipticus, R. lasiocarpus, R. moluccanus; Northeastern region (10 genera, 28 species): Citrus assamensis, C. ichangensis, C. indica, C. jambhiri, C. latipes, C. macroptera, C. medica, C. aurantium, Docynia indica, D. hookeriana, Eribotrya angustissima, Mangifera sylvatica, Musa acuminata/M. balbisiana complex, M. mannii, M. sikkimensis, M. superba, M. velutina, Pyrus pyrifolia, P. pashia, Prunus cerasoides, P. jenkinsii, Ribes glaciale, Rubus ellipticus, R. moluccanus, R. reticulatus, R. lasiocarpus, Myrica esculenta; Gangetic plains (9 genera, 11 species): Aegle marmelos, Cordia myxa, C. rothii, Emblica officinalis, Grewia asiatica, Morus spp., Phoenix spp., Syzygium spp., Ziziphus nummularia and other species; and Manilkara hexandra (more in north-western plains); Indus plains (9 genera, 11 species): Low occurrence of Syzygium, rich variation in Carissa congesta; other diversity like in Gangetic plains; Western peninsula (10 genera, 14 species): Artocarpus heterophyllus, A. lakoocha, Garcinia indica, Diospyros spp., Ensete superbum, Mangifera indica, Mimusops elengi, Spondias pinnata, Vitis spp., Ziziphus oenoplia, Z. rugosa, Rubus ellipticus, R. lasiocarpus, R. moluccanus.

Vegetables: Western Himalayas (5 genera, 8 species): Abelmoschus manihot (tetraphyllus forms), Cucumis hardwickii, C. trigonus, Luffa echinata, L. graveolens, Solanum incanum, Trichosanthes multiloba, T. himalensis; Eastern Himalayas (4 genera, 4 species): Abelmoschus manihot, Cucumis trigonus, Luffa graveolens, Neoluffa sikkimensis; Northeastern region (10 genera, 17 species): Abelmoschus manihot (pungens forms), Alocasia macrorrhiza, Amorphophallus bulbifer, Cucumis hystrix, Dioscorea alata, Luffa graveolens, Moghania vestita, Momordica cochinchinensis, M. macrophylla, M. subangulata, Trichosanthes cucumerina, T. dioica, T. dicaelosperma, T. khasiana, T. ovata, T. truncata, Solanum indicum; Gangetic plains (4 genera, 8 species): Abelmoschus tuberculatus, A. manihot (tetraphyllus forms), Luffa echinata, Momordica cymbalaria, M. dioica, M. cochinchinensis, Solanum incanum, S. indica; Indus plains (3 genera, 3 species): Momordica balsamina, Citrullus colocynthis, Cucumis prophetarum; Western peninsula (7 genera, 17 species): Abelmoschus angulosus, A. moschatus, A. manihot (pungens forms), A. ficulneus, Amorphophallus campanulatus, Cucumis setosus, C. trigonus, Luffa graveolens, Momordica cochinchinensis, Solanum indicum, Trichosanthes anamlaienisis, T. bracteata, T. cuspidata, T. horsfildii, T. perottitiana, T. nervifolia, T. villosa, Eastern Peninsula (8 genera, 21 species): Amorphophallus campanulatus, Abelmoschus manihot, A. moschatus, Colocasia antiquorum, Cucumis hystrix, C. setosus, Luffa acutangula var. amara, L. graveolens, L. umbellata, Momordica cymbalaria, M. denticulata, M. dioica, M. cochinchinensis, M. subangulata, Solanum indicum, S. melongena (insanum types), Trichosanthes bracteata, T. cordata, T. lepiniana, T. himalensis, T.

Spices and condiments: Western Himalayas (2 genera, 8 species): Allium spp. (A. rubellum, A. schoenoprasum, A. tuberosum and others), Carum bulbocastanum; Eastem Himalayas (3 genera, 3 species): Allium tuberosum, Amomum subulatum, Curcuma zeadoari; Northeastern region (4 genera, 7 species): Alpinia galanga, A. speciosa, Amomum aromaticum, Curcuma amada, C. zedoaria, Piper longum, P. peepuloides, Western peninsula (5 genera, 9 species): Cinnamomum zeylanicum, Curcuma montana, Myristica beddomei, M. malabarica, Piper nigurm, P. schmidtii, Zingiber cassumunar, Z. officinale, Z. zerumbat; Eastern peninsula (3 genera, 5 species): Curcuma amada, C. angustifolia, C. aromatica (wild forms occur in Chota-Nagpur plateau), Piper longum, Zingiber zerumbet.

Miscellaneous: Western Himalayas (2 genera, 2 species): Saccharum filifolium, Miscanthus nepalensis; Eastern Himalayas (3 genera, 5 species): Saccharum longisetosum, S. sikkimense (Erianthus), Miscanthus nudipus, M. taylorii, Camellia spp.; Northeastern region (4 genera, 11 species): Narenga fallax, Saccharum ravennae, S. longisetosum, S. procerum, S. rufipilum, S. sikkimensis, Miscanthus nepalensis, M. nudipus, M. taylorii, M. wardii, Camellia spp.; Gangetic plains (1 genus, 5 species): Saccharum rufipilum, S. ravennae, S. arundinaceum, S. bengalense, S. spontaneum; Indus plains (1 genus, | species): Saccharum longisetosum var. hookeri; Western peninsula (1 genus, | species): Narenga porphyrocoma; Eastern peninsula (2 genera, 2 species): Narenga porphyrocoma, Saccharum ravennae.

These wild taxa/types and feral populations have the potential to provide resources and opportunities for sustainable utilization of their desirable traits/genes for varietal improvement in crops.

Traditional/ethnic agroecosystems

A spectrum of traditional farming, wherein negligible modern agricultural practices are visible, substantiates diversity in cultivation zones in the country. Such agroecosystems are covered under shifting cultivation, home gardens, semi-permanent bush fallow, and terrace cultivation, and these systems have been described as the ethnic agroecosystems. An ecological balance is maintained in these systems between crop plants, and livestock and forestry within the shifting cultivation and subsistence farming in tribal settings.

Overall, these traditional/ethnic systems are rich source of primitive forms of crop plants that possess wide genetic base. Agroecological balance is achieved through mixed cropping, in which the various components have complementary requirements and/or manifestations, including tolerance to environmental stress, diseases and pests. Plant diversity occurs mainly in small fields under shifting cultivation and in the homestead gardens—backyards and kitchen gardens. The following categories may describe the occurrence of such diversity: (/) very selected wild vegetation being protected consciously by tribal communities, (i/) semi-domesticated diversity being raised more like cultigens, (iii) most of the annual, biennial and perennial plants being grown on use-based preferences by the tribals to meet their daily necessities— vegetables, fruits, condiments, medicinal plants, fuel, and fodder, and (iv) underexploited or underutilized domesticated diversity grown on field borders or in small plots near tribal dwellings/backyards/home gardens.

Some examples of ethnic agrobiodiversity in the tribal tracts of northeastern India, in terms of plants grown in shifting-cultivation and back-yards are: (a) Vegetables: Allium spp., Clerodendrum viscosum, C. colebrookianum, (b) Fruits: Citrus spp., Docynia indica, D. hookeriana, Garcinia spp., Prunus Jjenkinsii, Myrica esculenta, Elaeocarpus floribundus, Mangifera sylvatica, M. indica, Diospyros spp.» Machilus spp., Morus spp., Artocarpus spp., (c) Nuts: Hodgsonia heteroclita, (d) Condiments/ medicinal plants: Perilla frutescens, Ocimum spp., Elsholizia spp., Erangium foetidum, Curcuma spp., Zingiber spp., Amomum subulatum, Piper peepuloides, Acorus calamus, Alpinia malaccensis, Hedychium spicatum, (e) Multipurpose: Bambusa spp., Dendrocalamus spp., Alnus nepalensis, Parkia roxburghii, Prunus jenkinsii, Myrica esculenta, Elaeocarpus floribundus, Mangifera sylvatica, M.indica, Docynia indica, D. hookeriana, Diospyros spp., Machilus spp., Morus spp., Artocarpus spp., Moringa oleifera, Sesbania grandiflora, Bauhinia spp. Further, plants mainly grown in fields in small plots, with trees on field borders/marginal land are: Cereals/millets: Digitaria cruciata var. esculenta, Coix lacryma jobi var. mayuen; Vegetables: Moghania vestita (tubers), Phytolacca acinosa; Fuel/fodder: Alnus nepalensis, Ficus cunea and other spp.; Multipurose: Morus spp., Parkia roxburghii, Artocarpus heterophyllus, Aisandra butyracea, Myrica esculenta, Bauhinia spp.

Rich crop landraces and traditional/farmers’ varieties are still prevalent in several other pockets of the country. There is need to better understand these occurrences vis- a-vis the relative distribution of the wild related species and feral populations. This component of agrobiodiversity, nevertheless, also constitutes invaluable reservoir of well manifested genes for adaptabilities and preferences for use in the development of superior crop varieties.

AGROBIODIVERSITY/GENETIC RESOURCES AND PLANT IMPROVEMENT

Agriculture is a way of life or a tradition in India for centuries. Systematic advances in Indian agriculture were witnessed in the country in twentieth century but rapid strides were made since the mid-1960s, in the post-green revolution era. There has been an increasing trend of foodgrain production in the country, from 74.23 million tonnes in 1966-67 to a record production of 227.32 million tonnes in 2007-08. In addition to food security, the nutritional security has also been addressed. There has been a 3-times enhanced production of fruits and vegetables in the post-independence period. These production gains in agri-horticultural crops have mainly (92%) resulted from improvement in technology. Genetic resource utilization has played a significant role in these achievements. Agrobiodiversity has been utilized to produce over 3,300 high-yielding varieties (HY Vs)/hybrids of field crops and more than 500 HY Vs/hybrids of horticultural crops, which altogether helped in attaining the food self-sufficiency as well as the nutritional security.

The potentials of inter alia agrobiodiversity have been well realized in the country by harnessing increased productivity, input responsiveness, lodging resistance, early maturity, resistance to pests/pathogens, and tolerance to various abiotic stress factors in several crops. The production and productivity levels of various crops have recorded tremendous increase. In wheat, productivity increased by the year 2007-08 by 4.2 times from 1950-5] (beginning of First Five-Year Plan), and by 3.4 times from 1965—

132 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

66 (beginning of the green revolution period). This led to a corresponding increase in wheat production by more than 12 times, and over 7.5 times respectively. Productivity increases in other major cereals and millets since 1950-51 were also quite high, i.e. rice 4.7 times, maize 4.3 times, pearl millet 3.6 times and sorghum 2.8 times. In the same period, average yields improved by 5.3 times in cotton, over 2.7 times in rapeseed and mustard and more than twice in several other crops.

High-yiclding varicties of rice and wheat with better quality grains were developed for export. First-in-the-world hybrids were developed in India in crops like cotton, grain pearl millet, castor and pigeonpea. The country has been second, next to China, to develop hybrid rice. Also, very promising hybrids of sorghum and sunflower have been developed. Short-duration and or dwarf varieties of many pulse crops, namely greengram, blackgram, chickpea and pigeonpea, have been evolved to suit multiple cropping systems, thereby raising the cropping intensity. Similarly, in potato and other vegetable crops average productivity has increased by twice or more than twice since 1950-51. The productivity of banana/plantain has increased by 3 times. Regular bearing hybrids of mango and high shelf-life varicties of seedless grapes have been developed along with high-yielding, export quality varictics of tropical fruits, multiple disease- resistant vegetables, high-value spices and tuber crops for industrial use.

These achievements were made possible mainly because of free access to the genetic resources/ genepool of crop species under the agreed concept that PGR were common heritage of mankind, which should made be available without restriction for research and breeding purposes. The AlJ-India-co-ordinated research projects of ICAR for testing/verification of improved technology contributed equally well towards these achievements. In the present era, R&D and commercialization approaches in agriculture field are likely to be affected by the current intellectual property rights regime (effective since ].].2005). However, the real effects are yet to be seen or realized.

Sustainable use of agrobiodiversity

Genetic diversity is important for three main reasons. First, it helps in providing stability of farming systems through a range of inter- and intra-specific characteristics. In conventional or mixed farming systems broadly, losses suffered by one variety, if any, can be compensated for by continuity or gains in another. Secondly, it provides insurance against changing environmental conditions that may be anticipated for the future. For example, resistance to new diseases or adaptability to changed climatic conditions can be searched from within the existing agrobiodiversity. Thirdly, it embodies characteristics that are potentially valuable, but not yet exploited. The genes found in the largely untapped wealth of undomesticated plants can provide a basis for enhanced food availability in future by their use in improvement of crop varieties.

A significant example of appropriate use of existing agrobiodiversity may be provided in the extensive use of Oryza nivara, an Indian germplasm, for developing grassystunt virus-resistant varieties of rice. This disease during the 1970s had devastated rice fields from India to Indonesia, endangering the world’s single most important food crop. The resistant varieties are now being grown across the Southeast Asia covering more than 11 million hectares of rice fields. Likewise, there are several examples of crop epidemics that occurred as a result of narrow genetic base in the existing cultivars/landraces, which required incorporation of resistance/endurance genes

in the new varieties of these crops from respective genepools. The genetic diversity also helps crops to withstand changes in environment, climate and agroecosystems besides the threats from pests and diseases. In each of the diverse ecosystems, biological diversity is at the root of the complex ecological balance and its availability for plant improvement work is vital for all research and development efforts.

Overall, the agrobiodiversity exists primarily at the intra-species level and is important in respect of the genetic variability therein. New varieties of traditional crops continue to be developed through traditional and modern tools. However, no new major crop/ species has been domesticated from the wild in recent times. Future increases in agricultural production are likely to continue to be derived from the development of new plant varieties with desirable characteristics and from the more effective use of commercial inputs. However, the new varieties will have to be well- adapted to harsher environmental conditions, such as stress or excess of temperatures, moisture and salts, in order to ensure overall growth in agricultural productivity and production. Also, the sustainability of agricultural systems rather than their short- term productivity will have to be ensured besides minimizing/mitigating the other negative side-effects of modern agriculture.

Concern for loss of agrobiodiversity

Natural habitats of crop plant relatives and traditional/ ethnic agroecosystems are squeezing, and also losing the diversity therein, due to the expansion of agricultural production to frontier areas. Diversity is being threatened/ lost from the agricultural fields as well due to the adoption of improved varieties and other technologies by the farmers. This reduction of diversity in the agroecological and farming systems reduces the opportunity for continued breeding and selection for improvement. Hence, scientific management of these invaluable resources, particularly to ascertain their conservation for sustainable utilization has assumed greater significance over the time.

Together with the erosion of diversity in domesticated species, the related loss of biodiversity in agricultural soils is an important concern. The diversity and richness of soil organisms in the agricultural lands helps in maintaining their productivity. Soil biota, including the microorganisms therein, are instrumental for the maintenance of nutrient cycling, soil structure, moisture balance, and fertility of the soils. Mycorrhizae and fungi, which live in symbiosis with plant roots, are essential for nutrient and water uptake by plants. This rich resource is, nevertheless, largely invisible and unrecognized. Agroecosystems have been losing this diversity due to factors such as (i) a heavy use of agrochemicals, (ii) uniform crops/varieties over the time and the space minimising the synergistic equations with the diverse soil biota, (iii) heavy tillage with farm machinery disrupting the soil structure, and (iv) declining use of animal manure, crop residues, intercropping, cover crops, crop rotation and other farm practices that would maintain/increase the organic matter content of soils and reduce their exposure to the forces of erosion. These factors play together to affect losses in soil and crop productivity.

Another area of concern at the agroecosystem level is the erosion of the diversity of pollinator bees and other insects, and the natural enemies of crop pests and diseases. Such reduction also leads to increasing costs as well as declining productivity in agriculture. Use of agrochemicals, particularly the pesticides, is an important concern.

This is so because besides managing the target pest, it also leads to the killing of beneficial insects. Thus, the normal structure and function of the agroecosystem is altered, most of the time in unfavourable direction. Therefore, co-existence of agriculturally important biota in the agroecosystems, other than crops and varieties, should be considered equally important and appropriately attended or promoted.

CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT OF AGROBIODIVERSITY/PGR

The agrobiodiversity created and fostered with human intervention, in the evolution of agriculture, holds useful materials that are time-tested, well adapted and suit to the tastes and liking of local communities. The pyramiding and accumulation of favourable genes in suitable combinations in these materials has taken its own course over the generations. In accordance with prevalence of diversity, several regions in the world have been classified as the megadiversity centres and hot spots of biological diversity. In terms of agrobiodiversity, the world is divided into two main groups — the diversity rich north and the diversity poor south regions. This classification is based on the cumulative effect of the biodiversity available in terms of number of species known, the number of domestications made by the ancient human societies in the region, and the extent of agrobiodiversity available presently. The latter is important and relevant because even in the developing, gene-rich countries, the large scale popularization of the high-yielding, semi-dwarf varieties of major cereals had posed a threat to the diversity of the traditional materials available on-farm. This global realization had led to a serious thinking and the emergence of the idea of conserving available genetic resources for sustainable use. Further, it is also understood that conservation of genetic resources is a high priority because the countries Party to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) are obliged to promote conservation of their sovereign genetic resources for sustainable use.

Conservation approaches

The conservation of crop genetic resources includes their collection and preservation, or protection as it is, in a particular state and place/area. Two basic approaches for conservation, namely (i) the ex situ, and (ii) the in situ approach have been advocated and adopted. The ex situ conservation involves long-term storage of seeds or other propagules of genetic resources in places/ conditions, which are away or different from their natural habitats. These places are known as genebanks or repositories. On the other hand, the in situ conservation essentially fosters the biological diversity under natural conditions. It has been considered to be a potential approach for conserving the wild and forest plant species. However, it has also been advocated as a complementary approach to conserve agrobiodiversity under the traditional on-farm conditions, and their wild relatives under the natural habitats.

Ex situ conservation

Genebanks: The word ‘bank’ has not been commonly referred only as a place to keep the money/valuables but it has been used widely for other specific purposes, such as, ‘blood bank’, ‘semen bank’, ‘pollen bank’, etc. The term ‘genebank’ has been used rather lately and it is related largely to the conservation of PGR under ex situ conditions, The ex situ conservation of cultivated species and their wild relatives may

be done involving several modes, methods and institutions. These include, botanical gardens, field genebanks, seed/gene banks, tissue culture banks, cryo banks, DNA banks, herbaria and seed museums.

Unlike the banks where money can be frequently withdrawn, genetic resources are not to be often withdrawn from the long-term repository of the genebank. However, a short to medium term arrangement has to be made in parallel, for the storage and withdrawal of representative materials kept in long term repository, for their multiplication and use. A ‘genebank’, in this context, is not just a single institution but a part of a comprehensive genetic resource management programme, spearheaded/ co-ordinated by a nodal agency and implemented in collaboration by several active partners. In India, the National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources (NBPGR) of the ICAR and the crop based National Active Germplasm Sites (NAGS) located at several ICAR institutes and SAUs together represent the Indian plant genetic resources management system under the umbrella of the ICAR/DARE.

Major national genebanks: The first genebank in the world was developed at Saint Petersburg (now Leningrad) in Russia (the former USSR) in the pre-war period (early 1940s) with a total collection of about 40,000 seed samples of various crop plant species and their relatives made during the voyages of N.I. Vavilov. The movement of germplasm collection and conservation was geared up in the 1950s mainly with the financial support from the Rockefeller and Ford Foundations of the USA, and the Japanese and Australian Governments. In the 1960s, the US PL-480 Scheme and the Canadian IDRC Project took the lead and subsequently many other donor agencies contributed significantly in this area. Several national collections/genebanks were established following the example of the former USSR. These included genebanks in USA in 1958, in Ghana in 1964, in Japan in 1966, in Canada, Germany and Italy in 1970, in Poland in 1971, in Turkey in 1972, in Brazil in 1974 and in Ethiopia in 1976. In India, the National Gene Bank was established in 1983 at the NBPGR, New Delhi. The holdings of some major national genebanks in the world as well as the total germplasm held in the country are given (Table 5.3).

<i Source: *State of World's Plant Genetic Resources, FAO, Rome, 1996, 1998 (Under revi- On; for latest information, check at <http://www.fao.org/ag/cgrfa); WIEWS Germplasm Report 3132008" <http://apps3.fao.org/wiews/germplasm_query.htm?i_I=EN>; * current figures (as on

HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

Ex situ holdings in genebanks: Globally, more than 2.7 million crop accessions are held in various germplasm collections. This includes, over 1.3 million accessions of cereals; 370,000 accessions of food legumes; 220,000 accessions of forage legumes and grasses; 138,000 accessions of vegetables, and 74,000 clones of root crops (Figures being updated by FAO). Crops of major economic importance that are backed by agricultural research programmes are best represented in genebanks. However, for most crops there are several duplicate/replicate accessions, which together may account for at least 50% of the combined germplasm collection in these genebanks. There is a wide gap in the holdings in different genebanks, sometimes not matching with the strength of the respective region/ country in terms of prevalent diversity for the respective crop. Thus, some of the gene rich countries have poor ex sifu holdings in genebank and vice versa. These holdings are, nevertheless, sure to have a bearing on the exchange of germplasm or any other appropriate bargain.

Community genebanks: When certain farming communities take up some co- operative efforts or collaborative programme with the formal sector, mostly NGOs, to inventorize and conserve their prevailing cultivars and landraces for need based replenishment in cases of possible calamities or otherwise, it is generally accomplished in some innovative or pre-fabricated medium term storage facilities. The latter are known as community genebanks. However, there can be innovative storage structures for the purpose as well. Such conservation is relevant and important for dynamic and sustainable use, and also in view of the traditional knowledge or intellectual property involved in developing these genetic resources or the value being attached to them. Establishment of community genebanks strengthens the bargaining power of the concerned farming communities for inter alia exchange with improved types and/or deriving equitable share from the commercial benefits from these resources. The nature of a community genebank is largely equivalent to an active collection and it is desirable to deposit one set of such a collection with the national genebank for long-term conservation in the base collection.

In situ on farm conservation

The natural-undisturbed mode of conservation under in situ wild conditions and the conventional-undisturbed mode of maintaining the diverse populations under the traditional farming situations are duly recognized as the supplement genetic resource conservation approaches. The in situ on-farm conservation is the continued maintenance of plant populations within their agroecosystems to which these have been adapted. The in situ ‘approach is usually followed for the naturally occurring plant species, progenitors of crop plants, forest trees and other wild species. The ‘on farm’ conservation of (i) traditional cultivars and landraces of crops, (ii) semi-wild/semi- domesticated plant species, (iii) weedy/wild relatives of crops, and (iv) pheral (wild) populations of cultivated plants in the periphery of cultivated lands, such as bunds, isolation patches, surface irrigation tracks, etc. also comprises other form of in situ conservation. The regeneration of obsolete cultivars in their original habitats without conscious selection also contributes to the on-farm conservation. It is important to note that such cultivars had originated, established and/or developed in the same area with the active involvement of the local farming communities.

The farming households and communities are more poised in maintaining biological

diversity in the in situ mode as against formal institutions. The latter, however, manage the ex situ holdings in the genebanks. Globally, 1.5 billion farmers are estimated to be involved in subsistence farming and thereby on-farm conservation. They breed/ select varieties and improve crops on day-to-day basis albeit only inadvertently through their act of sustainable, traditional farming. The in situ conservation affects maintenance of ecosystems and natural habitats and also helps in the recovery of viable populations of plant species. This is because the in situ conservation, allows for continued, dynamic adaptation of plants to the environment in contrast with ex situ approach, which is merely storage or controlled planting away from natural habitats. Moreover, crops in areas under traditional agriculture are often enriched by the gene exchange with wild and weedy relatives. Therefore, the distribution pattern of the wild PGR in different phytogeographical regions, and the areas of their concentration where rich diversity of wild species still continues to perpetuate are of practical significance. It is important to understand the causes of loss or rejection of some varieties or characteristic under in situ conditions. The temporal and spatial movement of genes and varieties across the cropping systems and the adjoining semi-wild/wild habitats is inadequately observed but need intensive study in order to design effective monitoring, conservation and sustainable utilization programmes.

In India, 4.2% of the total land area is covered under protected areas. national parks and 496 wildlife sanctuaries, covering 183,000 square kilometer area in the major biogeographic zones of the country. These land mass and facilities provide ample opportunity to conserve the sovereign biodiversity inside or close to their natural habitats. Establishment of a ‘citrus gene sanctuary’ in the 1990s in Nokrek biosphere reserve, situated in Meghalaya State in the northeastern region of the country may be termed as the first in situ conservation effort for agrobiodiversity in India. In this project, basic information and research data on resource potential of the site was gathered and provided by the ICAR to the Ministry of Environment and Forests, which is the nodal agency for biodiversity matters in the country. The project was then taken up under Man and Biosphere Reserve programme of the United Nations. Further, sanctuaries of Orchids and Rhododendron have also been established in Sikkim. India holds two of the 18 global hot spots of biodiversity and there are other rich pockets of agrobiodiversity in the country where the respective species can be conserved/perpetuated under the natural/traditional systems. The diversity rich buffer zones, as small pockets that hold the actual and potential diversity, are important to apply the in situ approaches for genetic resource conservation. Nevertheless, this requires concentrated research and pilot scale efforts to demonstrate the worth, increase awareness, and help in micro planning to handle the conservation sites.

The activities related to survey, inventorization, and on-farm conservation of agrobiodiversity have been sporadically initiated in the public and non-governmental sectors. Collaborative projects have been initiated on the ‘on farm’ conservation of rice landraces and the related agrobiodiversity in tribal belts of Chhattisgarh in the Central India. Such studies have also been initiated, with wider involvement, for the rice-wheat system of cultivation, which is prevalent in the northern fertile plains. Besides, the national PGR management system is committed to provide technical

suggestions to the interested NGOs for on-farm conservation practices and/or awareness generation among the concerned farming communities.

Local biodiversity registers

The Biological Diversity Act, 2002 (BDA) has a provision under sec. 41 for the promotion of conservation, sustainable use and documentation of biodiversity at the local levels. For this, every local body shall constitute their own Biodiversity Management Committee (BMC). The main function of the BMC as per Rule 22 of BDA is to prepare People’s Biodiversity Register in consultation with local people. The Register shall contain comprehensive information on availability and knowledge of local biological resources, their medicinal or any other use or any other traditional knowledge associated with them. The BMC shall maintain and validate such biodiversity registers. A proper application of these provisions can also ensure lawful preservation of habitats, conservation of landraces, folk varieties and cultivars, domesticated stocks and breeds of animals and microorganisms and also chronicling of knowledge relating to local biodiversity. The BMCs can be consulted for any decision-making related to the use of local bioresources and the traditional knowledge associated with such resources.

Community recognition and reward

The Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Act, 2001 (PPV&FR Act) has a provision under the Farmers’ Rights part, to recognize the contribution of farmers and farming communities, as a collective team effort, for conserving, improving and making available PGR for the development of new plant varieties. As there is a greater

Source: PPV&FR Authority. Plant Variety Genome Savior Community Recognition from the National Gene Fund. http://www.plantauthority.gov.in/

possibility of observing such contributions by farmers/communities from the areas where in situ on-farm conservation is still practiced, the PPV&FR Authority has demarcated 17 agrobiodiversity hot spots in the country (Table 5.4), for giving some weightage to applicants from these areas. Nevertheless, the Plant Variety Genome Savior Community Recognition, under the PPV&FR Act, is open to all farmers/ communities, particularly the tribal and rural communities engaged in conservation, improvement and preservation of genetic resources of economic plants and their wild relatives. The applicant will also have to supply documented evidence of engagement in conservation of some valuable agrobiodiversity/crop biodiversity as well as that of deposit/sharing of such material with the Indian plant breeding institutions, where such material is used for development and release of new varieties for general cultivation.

MANAGEMENT OF BASE AND ACTIVE COLLECTIONS

Two main types of ex situ collections, ‘base’ and ‘active’ collections are held at most genebanks or the genetic resource centres. The base collection is a set of accessions, which in terms of genetic integrity, may be as close as possible to the original sample/ population, and is being preserved for posterity under long term storage conditions. Normally seeds from the base collection are not distributed directly to users. Rather, it acts as a back up to an active collection of the corresponding set of germplasm for its sustainable use. The long-term storage in base collection is done as per international standards. These standard requirements were established in 1985 by the seed storage committee of the International Board of Plant Genetic Resources (IBPGR, which subsequently was called the International Plant Genetic Resources Research Institute (IPGRI) and then the Bioversity International, as at present).

The acceptable standards for ex situ conservation in genebanks require a sub-zero temperature (<0°C) along with the seed moisture content ranging between 3 and 7%, depending upon the species. However, —18°C or cooler temperatures with 3-7% seed moisture content (depending upon species) are preferred. The seed moisture content may have to be raised in exceptional cases, for example when there is a strong evidence of problems like seed breakage during handling of particular species/variants at the standard (3—7%) seed moisture content.

The active collection, on the other hand, is comprised the accessions, which are available for immediate multiplication and distribution for use. Such accessions are stored for short to medium terms. Often the breeder’s working collection is also stored for short to medium term. Active collections have to be kept in conditions which ensure that the per cent viability of accessions does not fall below 65% for 10 to 20 years. Active collections are generally held at temperatures ranging between 0°C and 10°C depending upon the species stored, the prevailing ambient environment, and the cost factors.

In India, the estimated number of ex situ crop germplasm holdings in the base and active collection is around 0.9 million accessions. Holdings of over 0.75 million accessions were reported in the FAO’s WIEWS on-line database as on 1.4.2009. The base collection at the National Gene Bank at the NBPGR as on 31.3.2009 was 370,208 accessions of 1,547 crop plant species and their wild relatives. The second country Teport on the state of genetic resources in India reflected that more than 176,000

accessions were held in the national active germplasm sites (NAGS), which were used for research and crop improvement programmes. Further, the holdings of around 150 organized botanic gardens or large parks in India, figured at about 150,000 live plants belonging to nearly 4,000 species (including 250 endemic species). In addition, other public and private organizations have conserved germplasm in medium term storage facilities.

The Indian national genebank

The national genebank in India started in 1983 with a built-in module of 7° meter size and a holding capacity of 30,000 seed accessions in its two compartments maintained for medium term storage conditions at two different temperatures, 4°C and 10°C. As per the NBPGR reports, it has grown up with a base collection (as on 31.3.2009) of more than 370,000 accessions of orthodox seeds belonging to over 1,547 species. The Indian national genebank is among the three largest national genebanks in the world, along with those of China and USA. Besides having a seed bank for orthodox seed species, it has another component of cryo-conservation bank, which stores non-orthodox seeds, and encapsulated growing tissues, etc., under the liquid/ vapour nitrogen conditions, at the temperatures ranging between —150°C and —196°C. Further, another component of in vitro tissue culture bank in the Indian national genebank conserves the culture tissues of endangered, high value or difficult (difficult to conserve by other modes) species in standard media kept in tubes at varying degrees of temperature regimes (4°C to 25°C) and sub-culture intervals (4 to 24 months) depending upon the species. :

In terms of total holding capacity, the Indian national genebank is presently the largest in the world, which can conserve one million seed samples, a quarter- million cryo-conserved materials, and 25,000 tissue cultures besides other forms of propagules. The other components of the national genebank include field genebanks for mainly tree species, vines, and vegetatively propagated roots and tuber crops. These are located at various centres in the different agro-climatic conditions of the country and hold more than 5,000 accessions of trees and vines. The National Herbarium of Cultivated Plants (NHCP) at the NBPGR, New Delhi, is the only one such herbarium in the country and it holds more than 19,800 Herbarium Specimens (belonging to over 223 families, 1,178 genera and 2,956 species), 2,822 seed voucher specimens, and 564 economic products. As the figures would be growing over the time, it would be appropriate to update the information from the NBPGR Reports and other publications or <http://www.nbpgr.ernet.in/> from time to time.

National active germplasm sites

The NBPGR has linkage with 57 National Active Germplasm Sites (NAGS) for the management of active germplasm of field and horticultural crops. These NAGS are located at the NBPGR regional stations, other crop-based ICAR institutes or state agricultural universities, which maintain active collections of the genetic resources held by them and also exchange these resources with other interested users in the country. The system altogether is also known as the of the Indian national plant genetic resources management system. The field crop based NAGS have the medium term

storage facilities for germplasm conservation and use/exchange whereas the horticultural/perennial crops based NAGS have appropriate conservation garden facilities.

Sending seed samples for conservation — guidelines

The national PGR programme in India has developed elaborate sending germplasm for long term conservation in the national genebank at the NBPGR, New Delhi. The ex situ holdings in the genebanks have to be maintained following the international standards of genebanks. It is also important to ensure long-term viability of the materials conserved. Therefore, appropriate processing of seeds/ propagules that are sent for conservation has to be ascertained after the harvest, and packaging and transportation of samples have to be carried out in a manner that the damage incurred during the transit is negligible. The following checklist must be observed while sending seeds for ex situ conservation: (i) The seeds should be well developed and physiologically mature, (i’) seeds should be free from insects, weeds and diseases, (iii) seeds should be clean and free from undersized, shrivelled, immature and discoloured seeds, (iv) proper labeling and packing of seeds should be done to avoid damage, or mixture and loss of identity during transit, (v) the seeds/ propagules should not be treated with chemicals prior to their dispatch, (vi) the seeds must be sent to genebank at the earliest possible after the harvest or the collection as the case might be, (vii) each lot of samples must be accompanied with a minimum passport data of each accession, including, name of crop, location of collection, its original identification number/name, evaluation data, other special attributes (disease/stress resistance, quality), month and year of seed harvest etc.

Further, the seeds must be sent in sufficient numbers so that the accession can maintain the representative diversity/variability of its original population, including morphological variation of the seed lot, for a long time, even after a few cycles of regeneration if needed. It is suggested that a sample should contain at least 3,000 seeds for conservation in case of self-pollinated crop species, which are genetically homogenous and show little morphological variation, and at least 6,000 seeds of cross- pollinated crop species, which are genetically heterogeneous. However, depending upon availability, seed of wild or weedy forms, rare plant species and landraces may be provided in smaller quantities. These guidelines are only suggestive and not comprehensive. Particularly, the dispatch of germplasm samples comprising recalcitrant seeds, vegetative parts or tissues cultures need separate and specific guidelines. Therefore, it would be appropriate to approach/consult the national genebank at the NBPGR in advance. on a case-to-case basis assistance or advice so as to ensure a proper dispatch of germplasm aimed at its long-term conservation along with its proper identification.

ACCESSING GERMPLASM FOR RESEARCH USE

According to the Plants Quarantine Order, 2003 (PFS Order), the Director, NBPGR, New Delhi is authorized to issue valid permit for the import of germplasm, transgenic or genetically modified organism (GMO) for research or experimental purpose. Such permit for transgenic or GMO is, however, subject to approval by Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM) set up by the Department of Biotechnology (DBT)

under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 overall. Like in case of the supply of germplasm samples for conservation, the NBPGR has drawn guidelines for the applicants to fulfil some basic requirements and follow the procedure for acquiring materials for research/breeding purposes. All applicants intending to introduce/exchange plant germplasm should update themselves of these provisions and ensure effective implementation of the relevant regulations and guidelines.

Germplasm request can be made to the NBPGR by filling in the requisite application form. There is a system of getting an Import Permit on a prescribed performa from the Director, NBPGR, New Delhi for importing germplasm of agri-horticultural crops, which should be duly complied with. It has to be further ensured that the import consignment is accompanied by a Phytosanitary Certificate issued by an official agency of the exporting country. Scientists who may happen to receive the exotic germplasm material directly or those who may bring it along with them in person from abroad for research or experimental purposes must send it to the nodal agency, i.e. NBPGR, for quarantine cHeck as well as for getting national accession number. This would help in avoiding the risk of anonymity of the introduced sample as well as that of any inadvertent introduction of the exotic pests and seed-borne pathogens into the country though research samples. Material should also be free from plant debris, weed seeds and apparently unhealthy looking seeds.

All requests received from scientists/organizations from abroad for seed/ planting material for research or experiment should also be forwarded to Director, NBPGR along with other relevant information for its supply as appropriate and the issuance of a Phytosanitary Certificate. As per policy in vogue the released varieties/registered germplasm can be supplied for such purposes, in government approved collaborative projects. Otherwise, permission of National Biodiversity Authority (NBA) may be required as per the relevant provisions (sec. 3 and 4) of BDA. In case of vegetatively propagated crops, the material should be exchanged in in vitro form wherever possible because the in vitro cultures ensure a quicker quarantine clearance and also greatly reduce the risk of introducing exotic pests and pathogens along with the material. Also, vegetatively propagated plant material in the form of budwood, scion or unrooted cuttings should be preferred over rooted cuttings or plants.

It is desirable to send requests for import/ exchange of germplasm well in advance to be able to avail the next sowing season. Also, a set of the material received should be sent to national genebank after its multiplication, for conservation and sustainable use. It would also be important to provide feedback on the performance of the introduced/ exchanged material. Such feedback information in the database alone would help other scientists to take appropriate decisions for a subsequent use(s) of the same set of germplasm. As per the New Policy on Seed Development (vide Govt. of India Notification No. 11-71/88-SD 1 dt. September 16, 1988 and clarification issued in Jan. 1989), a small quantity is to be deposited with ICAR/NBPGR for research and accessioning.

Import of seed/ planting material for many crops from particular countries is prohibited under the Plant Quarantine Order, 2003 (with amendments from time to time). This must be complied with. It is also required not to import the material in bulk quantities at all through NBPGR. This is because the authorization to exchange/

AGROBIODIVERSITY 143

import through the Director, NBPGR is made only for small samples for research and experimental purposes.

The imported materials are given EC (Exotic Collection) numbers to each accession by NBPGR at the time of import. The materials acquired within the country are similarly assigned the IC (Indigenous Collection) numbers. It is in best interest not to change the original national accession numbers during subsequent use. This would ensure a due evidence of researcher’s involvement with the material to claim or allow any equitable share of benefit(s) as and when it/these may be applicable.

The NBPGR has also developed a system of receiving and forwarding requests for the in-country exchange of germplasm through the NAGS and other crop-based research centres in the country. Germplasm requests can also be made on-line to the Bureau or further assistance/ guidance can be got through specific requests on case-to-case basis.

MATERIAL TRANSFER AGREEMENTS

The exchange of germplasm was, until late 1990s, facilitated by the NBPGR on signing the declaration accompanying the application for each Import Permit, which read as follows, “J hereby, declare that the germplasm under import has no commercial value/ exclusive ownership and may be shared freely for research purposes.” This declaration was in line with the International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources, 1983 (IUPGR) to which India was a Party. This non-legally binding mechanism accepted all PGR (except those protected by exclusive IPRs) as the common heritage of mankind, which should be shared freely (unrestricted) for research purposes; however, such exchange might not be free of cost.

The Convention on Biological Diversity, 1993 (CBD) emerged as the first legal mechanism dealing with biodiversity. India is also Party to CBD. The objectives of CBD inter-alia include facilitation for appropriate access to genetic resources and appropriate transfer of relevant technologies on prior informed consent (PIC) and on mutually agreed terms (MAT). This objective clearly provides for sharing of benefits accrued from commercial use of genetic resources on an equitable basis and in a fair and transparent manner. It is, therefore, important that exchange of genetic resources is made transparent involving appropriate PIC and MAT keeping in view that benefit sharing on equitable basis can be ensured for such exchange as and when subsequently applicable. In practice, therefore, it requires use of Material Transfer Agreements (MTA). A format has been subsequently provided under the Bonn Guidelines, issued by CBD.

The MTA adopted under the system of single window germplasm exchange in India binds the recipient(s) of germplasm (i) not to claim ownership nor to seek intellectual property right (IPR) over the germplasm material received and the related information; (ii) not to use the material or its derivatives for commercial purposes or profit making, whatsoever, without written prior consent; (iii) not to distribute or transfer samples of the material to any other party except for those directly engaged in research under his/her/their supervision, without written prior consent; and, (iv) to supply the feedback from use of the material received. It should be appreciated that the use of such MTA would encourage transparency in the use of germplasm particularly in respect of equitable sharing of benefits, if any. Hence, this must be complied in a Positive spirit. It is also to be noted that all suppliers of germplasm today require an

MTA, which the NBPGR complies being the nodal agency for single window exchange, Therefore, the use of exotic/imported germplasm should be done in as much transparent way as possible and feedback from its use must be furnished for the national PGR database.

In respect of the exchange of germplasm at the global level, besides the Bonn Guidelines issued by CBD, which suggest the use of a standard format for MTA, the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (ITPGRFA) has also released a Standard Material Transfer Agreement (SMTA), which has implications of germplasm access on benefit sharing under the Treaty. As a mandate, it is applicable for germplasm of agreed list of 64 crops, which are also called Annexure- I crops; however, the Treaty encourages all contracting parties to use the SMTA for germplasm of other crops as well. The SMTA is currently much in use by the International Gene Banks of the Consultative Group of International Agricultural Research (CGIAR). The conditions of SMTA apply to the transfer of germplasm to another person or entity, as well as to any subsequent transfers of those materials. Also, this standard MTA shall include a requirement to seek written consent of the recipient for agreeing to an equitable share of the benefits arising from the commercialization of the material accessed. The Governing Body of ITPGRFA has already approved two standard formulae for benefit sharing from the use/commercial use of the material accessed under SMTA. The money thus stipulated has to be deposited by concerned persons/entities in the International Fund established by FAO for this purpose.

Further, at the sub-regional level in south Asia, a standard material transfer agreement format has been developed for use in germplasm exchange among the SAARC member countries. It has approval of all members, and is endorsed by the SAARC Secretariat. The basic format is consistent with the MTA used by NBPGR. However, copies of the SAARC MTA can be obtained from the Bureau while processing for import/ export requests.

It may be further added that for entering into a germplasm exchange agreement with another party, a duly negotiated and signed MTA will be helpful in all ways. Standard formats could be available from any of the above MTAs, and one may have to alter those clauses where any alternative option has been agreed to on mutual consent. In this context, it may be pertinent to refer to the check-list of basic elements that should be incorporated in a good MTA. One such check-list is also available in the ICAR Guidelines for Intellectual Property Management and Technology Transfer/ Commercialization, 2006. The text is readily available from Internet at the ICAR home page (www. icar.org.in).

OTHER PGR MANAGEMENT CONCERNS

Besides genetic resource conservation, exchange and quarantine, the other facets of genetic resource management include, plant exploration and germplasm collection, characterization, evaluation, documentation, assessment of variation, evaluation for adaptability parameters and specific traits, identification of useful genes, utilization per se, in breeding or other research. Also, there are two more important areas to address, namely rejuvenation of germplasm from part of the base collection when viability of the accession falls below a specified limit, and germplasm enhancement in a suitable agronomic base.

Addressing issues concerning PGR exploration and collection

The issue of germplasm survey and collection in the wake of recognition of sovereign rights of nations over their biodiversity/PGR needs special attention. The world has moved away from the era of free flow of PGR. Germplasm collecting is done for several direct and indirect reasons, such as conservation for sustainable use, bioprospecting, access for use per se or indirectly for research, experimental or commercial purposes. In this context, two purposes, namely conservation for sustainable use or access for use in research for public good highlight direct public interest. It.can, therefore, be argued that providing access to PGR for these two purposes should be obligatory. In other cases, the issue of benefit sharing can clearly arise, and, therefore, access should be facilitated through judicial/ non-judicial instruments such as Material Transfer Agreement (MTA), Benefit Sharing Agreement etc.

The relationship between the genetic resource collecting team and the custodian/ owner could be unpredictable. The underlying reasons for this are a lack or paucity of awareness, and sometimes, possibly an unclear intention of each party. Generally, the role of collector in the first two cases is played by the public sector institutions whereas private sector may be directly involved in other cases like bioprospecting. The role of NGOs in germplasm collecting may also be viewed as sometimes being the moderators or often for generating the awareness.

It is desirable to follow certain code of conduct by the collecting missions to increase transparency. This is because it may not be possible to otherwise explain the intentions of the collectors for use of material being accessed. Such code could be a directive principle or it may be voluntary. It has to be elaborated at different levels, such as, within country or international collecting. The FAO has also provided an International Code of Conduct for Plant Germplasm Collecting and Transfer (ICCPGCT) in 1993 under its global PGR management system. It was also decided that the Code may be taken up for the consideration of its application/revision after the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (ITPGRFA) is enforced. As the Treaty has become effective since 29 June 2004, this issue may be further pursued and the results will be known in due course.

Further, the rights of custodian farming communities and tribals should be respected as per the CBD, Constitutional Provisions, and the Indian law. The benefit sharing and compensation to farming communities clauses under the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Act, 2001 (PPVFRA 2001), and the requirement of mandatory declaration in the patent application as to the source and acquisition of the biological material used in an invention, under the Patents Act, 1970 (with Amendments), require that the data set of the exploration and collection missions should be appropriate and kept well in order to establish authenticity of the information provided.

Sovereign Rights over Natural and Biological Resources

The United Nations recognized sovereignty of nations over their natural wealth and resources in 1952. At the country level, states invariably hold the rights over natural resources irrespective of the land ownership by individuals or groups/ companies. The corresponding status in respect of the biological resources was ascertained four decades later in 1991/1992. First, the FAO International Undertaking

on Plant Genetic Resources ([UPGR) affirmed in 1991 (Resolution 3/91 of the FAO Council) that the concept of PGR being the common heritage of mankind, as advocated by the Undertaking, was subject to the sovereign rights of nations over their genetic resources. Subsequently, the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), 1992 reaffirmed in its preamble that countries (States) have sovereign rights over their own biological resources. The CBD, however, became effective on 29 December 1993.

ACCESS AND BENEFIT SHARING

The objectives of the CBD, to be pursued in accordance with its relevant provisions, include inter-alia fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources. This may include appropriate access to rightfully owned/possessed genetic resources; transfer of relevant rightfully held technologies; and appropriate and equitable benefit sharing. Elaborate provision for access to genetic resources is covered in the CBD Article 15; but there is no specific CBD Article to directly deal with benefit sharing. Nevertheless, there is a mention of sharing benefits with parties to the convention in the CBD Article 15.7. According to this, each country party to CBD is required to take appropriate legislative, administrative or policy measures in accordance with other relevant Articles, namely 16 (Access to and Transfer of Technology), 19 (Handling of Biotechnology and Distribution of its Benefits) and, 20 and 21 (Financial Resources and Mechanism), where necessary. Such measures at the national level should primarily aim at sharing the results of research and development and the benefits arising from the commercial and other utilization of genetic resources in a fair and equitable way with any other CBD member country that would provide the resources on mutually agreed terms.

The Conference of Parties (COP), which is the highest body to pursue the implementation of the CBD, has reviewed in its fifth meeting (COP-V) the phase I of the programme of work on agricultural biological diversity and also adopted a multi- year work programme. In the latter, the COP-V identified the areas of access and benefit sharing measures, and intellectual property issues under the element ‘adaptive management’. In particular, the COP-V recommended for the identification of appropriate marketing and trade policies, and legal and economic measures which may support beneficial practices in respect of inter alia access, benefit sharing and intellectual property matters at the national and international levels.

As already mentioned in this chapter, a system of access and benefit sharing through the use of SMTA has also been established under the ITPGRFA. The germplasm exchange through SMTA provides efficient, effective, and transparent mechanism to facilitate access to PGR and to share, in a fair and equitable way, the benefits arising from the utilization of these resources. The contracting parties need to develop their legislations or other instruments/appropriate measures for providing such germplasm access to others. Access under SMTA may be provided solely for the purpose of utilization and conservation for research, breeding and training purposes, and such purposes may not include chemical, pharmaceutical and/or other non-food/feed industrial uses. In the case of multiple-use crops (food and non-food), their transfer either through SMTA or Bonn Guidelines is equally possible.

Under the ITPGRFA, access to PGR is to be accorded expeditiously. Germplasm may be given free of charge, or only minimal cost involved may be charged. Access to

a germplasm material under SMTA also includes access to its available passport data and any other non-confidential descriptive information associated with its use. There is a condition that the recipients shall not claim any intellectual property or other rights that limit the facilitated access to the germplasm, or their genetic parts or components, in the form received through SMTA. Further, access to PGR under development, including the materials being developed by farmers, shall be at the discretion of the developers. Access to germplasm protected by intellectual and other property rights shall be consistent with relevant international agreements/ national laws. Also, the access to germplasm found in in situ conditions will be provided according to national legislations or in accordance with the standards Jaid down under the ITPGRFA. In case of any contractual disputes arising under SMTA, countries shall ensure that an opportunity to seek recourse is available in their jurisdictions under their legal systems, which may recognize that obligations arising under SMTA rest exclusively with the parties to the agreement. The Governing Body of ITPGRFA shall, however, provide policy direction and guidance from time to time.

The ITPGERFA further requires that in cases of emergency/disaster, countries shall provide facilitated access to appropriate germplasm to help re-establish the agricultural systems, in co-operation with disaster relief co-ordinators. The benefits arising from the use, including commercial use, of germplasm accessed shall be shared fairly and equitably through: (i) the exchange of information, (ii) access to and transfer of technology, (iii) capacity-building, and (iv) the sharing of the benefits arising from commercialization. ITPGRFA shall monitor these activities in the light of the priority activity areas in the Global Plan of Action (GPA), and the directives/mechanism developed by the Governing Body from time to time.

CBD AND AGROBIODIVERSITY

There is no direct mention of agrobiodiversity in the CBD objectives or any one of its other Articles. However, the Articles 8 (j) covered under ‘in situ conservation’ and 10 (c) covered under ‘Sustainable Use of Components of Biological Diversity’ indirectly refer to inter alia management of agrobiodiversity. The Conference of Parties (COP) to the CBD has, however, made direct and increasing reference of this subset in their official business. Accordingly, the decisions II/15, III/11, IV/6, V/5, etc. of COP laid emphasis that agrobiodiversity must receive adequate attention in the member nations’ development plans. The CBD considered the issue of approval and involvement of holders of traditional knowledge for the sustainable use of biological diversity to be important and having wider application [Articles 8 (j) and 10 (c)]. However, the Convention has not specifically outlined as to how the domestic PIC of local communities and farmers vis-a-vis the potential users of bioresources/PGR should be obtained and organized under the national laws.

The COP-V recognized inter alia the contribution of farmers, indigenous and local communities to the conservation and sustainable use of agricultural biodiversity and the importance of agricultural biodiversity to their livelihoods (Decision V/S). It emphasized the importance of their participation in the implementation of the programme of work, and recognized the need for incentives, in accordance/consistence with the CBD Articles 11 (Incentive Measures) and 22 (Relationship with Other International Conventions). Decision V/5 also supported for Capacity-building and

information exchange to benefit farmers, indigenous and local communities. COP-V categorically invited countries and relevant organizations to support actions to raise public awareness in support of sustainable farming and food production systems that maintain agrobiodiversity. The work programmes promoted under the Decision V/5 of the COP-V included (i) priority attention to components of biodiversity responsible for the maintenance of ecosystem services that may be important for the sustainability of agriculture, including pollinators, (ii) to further study the potential implications of genetic use restriction technologies (GURT) for the conservation and sustainable use of agrobiodiversity and the range of agricultural production systems in different countries, and identify relevant policy questions and socio-economic issues that may need to be addressed.

The Decision V/5 included, besides details of the scope of agrobiodiversity, the launching of some targeted co-operative initiatives under various programme elements within the overall frame of work set out by the COP. This included, (i) to provide a comprehensive analysis of status and trends of the world’s agrobiodiversity and of their underlying causes (including a focus on the goods and services agrobiodiversity provides), as well of local knowledge of its management, (ii) to identify management practices, technologies and policies that promote the positive and mitigate the negative impacts of agriculture on biodiversity, and enhance productivity and the capacity to sustain livelihoods, by expanding knowledge, understanding and awareness of the multiple goods and services provided by the different levels and functions of agricultural biodiversity, (iii) to strengthen the capacities of farmers, indigenous and local communities, and their organizations and other stakeholders, to sustainably manage the agrobiodiversity so as to increase the benefits, and to promote awareness and responsible action, (iv) to support the development of national plans or strategies for the conservation and sustainable use of agrobiodiversity and to promote their mainstreaming and integration in sectoral and cross-sectoral plans and programmes. The rationale, various activities, and ways and means in order to meet the objectives were also expressly spelt out by the COP-V.

The COP-V further recognized the potential contribution that the revised IUPGR (i.e. ITPGRFA) may make, in harmony with the CBD, to assist in the implementation of this programme of work. In this context, it may be observed that some key issues, which the CBD could not address, were attended by the FAO Global System in the process of revision of the IUPGR. These included, (i) the pre-CBD ex situ collections held at botanical gardens, herbaria, etc., and also the collections held by International Agricultural Research Centres (IARCs) of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) in trust of mankind under agreement with the FAO, and (ii) the realization of Farmers’ Rights vis-a-vis equitable benefit sharing. The revision process culminated into ITPGRFA in 2001, which became effective on 29 June 2004. As earlier explained in this chapter, the ITPGRFA has made elaborate provisions for multilateral access through SMTA, and benefit sharing in respect of the agreed list of 65 crops (Annexure-I crops), which are considered important for food

- agreed list of 65 crops (Annexure-I crops), which are considered important for food security and interdependence.

SUSTAINABLE USE OF PLANT GENETIC RESOURCES

The development of new improved varieties of crops essentially requires genetic

resources irrespective of the technology used. Their collection, evaluation/assessment, documentation, and genetic enhancement to facilitate use in breeding blocks are integral part of crop science research. Genetic enhancement and/or pre-breeding are further important to ascertain a continuous availability of donor stocks in good agronomic base in the breeding blocks. In the past 3-4 decades, several LARCs and the national PGR management programmes have effectively contributed in pre-breeding and variety development/selection that led to enhanced agricultural production and food security in many countries of the world. These achievements were made possible mainly due to increased attention towards PGR augmentation, i.c. collection/ exchange, evaluation and documentation. Also, the intergovernmental agreement and governmental policies of free exchange of genetic resources until the early 1990s brought the desired results.

However, the new institutional mechanisms led by the CBD and also the World Trade Organization (WTO), particularly the Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) Agreement, have increasingly focussed the world attention towards the sovereign rights of States in relation to PGR, and the private, exclusive rights (IPR) over the innovations made by individuals and research/R&D entities, respectively. Addressing these issues at the national level is crucial to sustain and further achieve the gains in agricultural production and productivity. To cope up with the emerging situation, some corresponding legislative and regulatory measures were taken in India. These include the enactment of the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights (PPV&FR) Act, 2001, the Geographical Indications (Registration and Protection) Act 1999, and the Biological Diversity Act, 2002. The Patents Act, 1970 was also amended thrice, in 1999, 2002 and 2005.

The legal application of various provisions of CBD particularly facilitated access and benefit sharing will be made under the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 which, along with corresponding Rules, 2003 is in place. The NBA is located in Chennai. The Authority has already accorded approvals for more than 320 applications made to it in respect of various provisions of the law (access to bioresources (21), transfer of research results (8), third party transfer (16), collaborative research (29), and intellectual property rights (253)), and signed 55 agreements of mutually agreed terms by 31 March 2009 for these approvals of various categories. However, NBA has also rejected 72 such applications on case-to-case basis.

Sustainable use of genetic resources will thus be affected by various regulatory measures, which need to be clearly understood and judiciously followed in practice. The import and quarantine of plant germplasm, and the biosafety assessment of transgenic (GMO) materials, need strict regulatory enforcement. Access to genetic resource for sustainable use and equitable sharing of benefits accrued therefrom are becoming increasingly important issues that need urgent attention. As a result, the need for developing and strengthening the field of PGR services, policy, research and jurisprudence assumes high importance. There is also a need to further address the system-wide requirements of PGR management in India, with emphasis on matters concerning legitimate ownership of genetic resources and transparent benefit sharing mechanism. It would also be in the overall interest that an exemption for research use of germplasm for generating public good must continue to receive a high priority in the country.

India’s international commitments towards the management of agrobiodiversity/

genetic resources include the implementation of the Global Plan of Action (GPA), the ITPGRFA and the CBD, which should be duly addressed. For example, there is no direct legal provision made so far in respect of the implementation of ITPGRFA in the country to honour the international commitment, which is a concern. Also, the need to declare particular accessions from the national genebank holding as the Designated Germplasm for the purpose of facilitated access and benefit sharing under the ITPGRFA has been assuming significance. In this context, it would logical that the Indian material already listed on the shelves of the international genebanks, for which copies are available in the national base collection, together with public domain varieties of crops as well as materials contributed in the international nursery trials by the Indian programmes, samples of which are also held in the base collection, can be endorsed as the designated germplasm in the first lot.

AGROBIODIVERSITY/PGR AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS

Development of new plant varieties attracts IPR under the Indian law. The current situation is.that protection for plant varieties is provided by a sui generis legislation— the PPV&FR Act, 2001. The PPF&FR Rules were notified in 2003, the Authority was established in 2005, and the PPV&FR Regulations were notified in 2006. The registration of 12 species (food crops) previously notified by the Central Government was initiated in May, 2007. At present 18 species (14 crops) are notified, for which over 1,000 applications for registration have been received by the Registrar. Under the PPV&FR Act, 2001, extant varieties, including farmers’ varieties, can be protected in addition to new and Essentially Derived varieties. A farmer is recognized as breeder, conserver and preserver of traditional varieties of crops and wild species in addition to being a cultivator. Any plant variety having genetic use restriction technology (GURT), like terminator gene, is barred from protection of IPR under the Indian law. A National Gene Fund is established to support/promote conservation of genetic resources, provide benefit sharing, and recognition/reward to concerned farmers/ communities. The Act provides extensive farmers’ rights, and it recognizes them as farmer-breeder, farmer-conserver as well as farmer-holder of genetic resources.

Similarly, there is provision for registration and protection of geographical indications for those genetic resources albeit as tradable goods, which may be unique to a particular area. The Geographical Indications (Registration and Protection) Act, 1999 together with the sub-ordinate legislation covering Rules and Procedures have been put in place in September 2003. The Headquarter of the Controller of Geographical Indications is in Chennai. This law accords protection to goods, including agricultural and manufactured goods that have originated or manufactured in a territory, region or locality of the country where the given quality, reputation or other characteristic of such goods are essentially attributable to the geographical origin. Such protection shall be from any act of passing off, unfair competition, etc. and it can also be availed by registration in other countries that are members of the World Trade Organization, under their corresponding law. More than a dozen agricultural goods including, rice, banana, orange, pepper, tea, coffee, etc. from specific regions in the country have been already registered and protected as geographical indications. Premium goods among these, like the Darjeeling Tea have also been registered in many other countries as well where the market potentials are high.

In so far as patents in India are concerned, the Act in force does not provide protection to plant varieties, seeds and other biological materials, except ‘microorganisms’. Nevertheless, as earlier mentioned, it is mandatory to declare the source of any biological material concerning a patent application and also any traditional knowledge of farming communities associated with its use, irrespective of whether it was an admitted use or a potential use only. Non-disclosure in either case can amount to opposition and denial for grant or revocation of patent.

Similarly, it is mandatory to seek approval of NBA, under the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 in case any IPR is to be claimed over the bioresource accessed from India or its derivatives/products. It may be appreciated that NBA while giving such approvals for seeking IPR by applicants, until 31 March 2009, has entered into agreements (for benefit sharing) with the IPR claimants in 23 cases.

GLOBAL PLAN OF ACTION AND INDIAN SCENARIO

The United Nations had declared a comprehensive plan of action to be taken globally, at the international, regional, national and local levels, in the 21st century for addressing various human impacts on the environment, including the biodiversity/agrobiodiversity. This is commonly known as ‘Agenda 21’. It was adopted at the UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) held in Rio de Janerio, Brazil, in June 1992, which also adopted the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). Chapters 14 to 16 of this comprehensive agenda concern sustainable agriculture, agrobiodiversity management conservation and use, and environmentally safe application of biotechnology in the utilization of genetic resources. It called for inter-alia giving special importance to and developing integrated strategies, sectoral/ cross-sectoral plans, programmes and policies for conservation of biodiversity and sustainable use of bio- and genetic resources.

The FAO Global System on ‘Plant Genetic Resources’ was already active in its area domain, which also concerned the Agenda 21. The Fourth International Technical Conference on Plant Genetic Resources, hosted by FAO at Leipzig, Germany in 1996, adopted a Global Plan of Action (GPA) that provided framework for action for the conservation and sustainable use of PGR for Food and Agriculture (PGRFA) at local, national, regional and international levels, thereby assuming to address inter-alia the needs and priorities expressed in the Agenda 21. The GPA is also an important contribution to the implementation of the CBD in Agrobiodiversity/Food and Agriculture. It is also one of the supporting elements to the ITPGRFA.

Main objectives of GPA include: ensure conservation of agrobiodiversity/PGRFA as a basis for food security; promote their sustainable use to foster development and reduce hunger and poverty; and promote a fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising from their use. The GPA provides a framework for 20 inter-related activities covered in four key areas, namely (i) Jn situ Conservation and Development, (ii) Ex situ Conservation, (iii) Utilization of agrobiodiversity/ PGRFA, and (iv) Institutions and Capacity Building. The overall progress in implementation of GPA is monitored through the FAO Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (CGRFA).

In India, adequate attention has been given to most of the activities listed under the GPA. Also, for certain activities, priorities have been enhanced over the time depending

152 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

upon the national needs and the global requirements. A high priority for supporting planned and targeted collections was accorded in a programme on Plant Biodiversity Management under the National Agricultural Technology Project (NATP) ina mission mode. Restoration and regeneration of genetic resources and developing monitoring and early warning system have also been promoted in the priority order later on as compared with the one that existed in 1996. The NBPGR was designated as the Nodal Agency for implementing the GPA in the country whereas the overall co-ordination work for the FAO Global System matters rests with the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC). Increasing priority for various GPA activities in the country over the time may be scen from Table 5.5.

GPA area/activity

Priority: 1, high; 2, medium; 3, low. Source : NBPGR Reports; Compiled.

Whereas a comprehensive and well-knit action plan is available under GPA for putting into practice the conservation and sustainable use of PGR, its successful - implementation clearly needs international cooperation, financial mechanism and

funding. Also, it requires a multilateral environment committed to share responsibilities and/or burden whatsoever. In practice, the GPA activities have been actively carried out in India with Plan Budget or Project-based resources by the ICAR but some committed international and inter-departmental funding as per the CBD or GPA requirements/stipulations would also be desirable.

It may be broadly observed that after the enforcement of the CBD, the international germplasm exchange has experienced significant retardation in most cases in the absence of appropriate enforcement mechanism for prior informed consent and also lack of confidence building measures. Implementation of CBD provisions, particularly access and benefit sharing, will be done under the Biological Diversity Act, 2002. The ITPGRFA, 2001, nevertheless, is further expected to bring out some workable solutions to the multilateral exchange of germplasm and benefit sharing for the agreed list and probably other crops as well. This would need due attention for streamlining of its legal, policy and administrative dimensions in the national context.

FURTHER PRIORITIES

A systematic action on the following stipulated action-points may bring the desired impact and outcome from the scientific and well-regulated management of agrobiodiversity/ PGR in the country.

Survey of agrobiodiversity/PGR

There should be periodic survey and inventories of the distribution of agrobiodiversity/ PGR, including their wild relatives. This would help in understanding the distributional changes, and to monitor the complementary conservation approaches being practised. It will also help in identifying the genetic resources that might be facing varying degrees of threat. The survey may also help consolidate information about the dynamism of the indigenous knowledge for use of genetic resources, and the traditional practices being followed for conservation and management of agro- systems. Efforts should also be made to develop appropriate methodology and prediction models for the long-term survey and analyses.

Proper use of passport data sheets can further earn credibility of the national PGR management system. Adequate use of the passport data sheets indeed helps in establishing the identity of the provider of a particular genetic resource. The farmers should be made aware through contacts and literature in local languages about the legal and procedural developments in relation to access and benefit sharing. Disclosure of the custodianship of particular landraces or farmer varieties in the datasheet should be encouraged to help ascertain equitable share of benefits from the use of such genetic resource, as and when applicable.

Supporting planned and targeted collection of PGR

The samples conserved ex situ in the genebanks are not expected to always represent the total variation available in field population. Therefore, attempts should be made to supplement the germplasm collection efforts as and where needed. For this, advance techniques like satellite imagery and GIS may be used to recapitulate and explore particular localities. Attempts should also be made to fill in the gaps. Efforts need to be made to collect wild relatives, ecotypes, landraces, farmer varieties, and other

cultivars along with the associated traditional information, based on the interaction with the provider (farmers or others) and the information available in literature.

Supporting on-farm management and improvement of farmers’ cultivars

Farmers in several tribal areas and remote and backward pockets in India continue to maintain traditional varieties and systems either by choice or because of socio- environmental factors that compel such cultivation. Their awareness of, or liking for, high yielding varieties and intensive cropping is minimal. Nevertheless, there is scope to improve their agricultural production/income by systematic in situ on-farm management and improvement within the crop populations. Initiative should be taken to encourage participatory on-farm management of genetic resource by farmers. In this endeavour, emphasis should be laid on the involvement of farm women and also on greater access by farmers to appropriate technology. This would require greater cooperation among the public, co-operative, non-governmental, and private sectors. Through the participatory approach, it would be possible to improve the existing cultures and types that may inherit adaptability and higher grain yield or other economic yields in single genome/crop. This could help in partly realising the needed economic incentive for participatory genetic resource management from higher yield/production and thereby farm income.

In addition, maintenance of community genebanks can be demonstrated/ further encouraged wherein the farmers would maintain their improved traditional seed for use in adverse conditions. Since this action point addresses an altogether new subject for many farmers and PGR workers hailing from different disciplines/backgrounds, training needs will be higher to develop awareness and education for PGR, particularly the on-farm conservation. This will also require multi- and inter-disciplinary research on various aspects, such as, (a) enthnobotany and socio-economics that may lead to understanding and analysis of farmers’ knowledge for on-farm management, selection and utilization of PGR, (b) population and conservation biology to understand dynamics of genetic diversity of local landraces and farmer varieties, (c) crop improvement research and front line extension studies for life support crop species, and (d) farmers’ linkage with formal gene banks.

Assisting farmers in restoration of PGR

Threats from calamities and catastrophes may require replenishment and restoration of seed of traditional materials being grown by the farming communities, locally from the community genebanks or from the ex situ collections. Such material should be identified, multiplied and replenished to farmers or research centres in the vicinity. The national PGR management system/National Agricultural Technology Project had taken timely initiatives for such an action following a cyclone in Orissa in 1999, and such efforts must be repeated as and when required. Acquisition, multiplication and re-introduction of materials should be taken up using appropriate scientific, technical and regulatory measures. NGOs, cooperatives/self-help groups and private organizations active in the locality should be involved in these efforts. Information system should be developed at the national level to help identify and track the genetic resources that may need appropriate re-introduction in particular local farming systems.

Promoting in situ conservation of wild relatives and wild species

The natural and disturbed ecosystems hold important genetic resources of traditionally gathered food, fodder and medicinal plants, including the endemic and threatened wild relatives of cop plants and wild species of economic importance. Such genetic diversity, because of intimate interactions and relationship with the ecosystem, can be better conserved there itself and not under ex situ conditions. Therefore, such materials should be protected in situ, whether in the protected areas or their vicinity. Such species/ localities should be surveyed and identified and the nodal agency (NBA/ MoEF) should take note of these reports for their appropriate notification. Over the time, monitoring should be done with collaborative efforts. Participation of the local farming and nomadic communities/tribals should be encouraged in identification and maintenance of species.

Sustaining existing collections and expanding ex situ conservation

Further development and/or extension of medium- and long-term storage facilities of international standard will have to be done at the National Gene Bank, NAGS and other repositories in the public system and also in the interested NGO sector. Private sector has also to be encouraged to share their germplasm for research use. Periodical monitoring for viability of random collections should be done regularly, starting after 10-15 years of conserving a particular accession in the base collection. In this activity, use of molecular techniques should be standardized. High priority should be accorded to safeguard and maintain unique and invaluable sources of diversity, and samples of rare and endangered species. The ultimate goal should be to help in developing an efficient, goal oriented, economically viable and sustainable national system of ex situ conservation.

All accessions in active collections at concerned institutions must be ultimately provided for the long term storage in the national base collection. The database of all ex situ collections should be maintained and updated periodically to assist in planning and implementation. Greater emphasis should be given on Research and Development of alternate modes/techniques of ex situ conservation of different categories of PGR seeds/other propagules such as orthodox seed banks, cryo banks, tissue culture banks, botanical gardens, field genebanks etc. Also, strengthening and expansion of institutional capacity for different modes of ex situ conservation, technical training and human resource development should be given urgent attention.

Expanding PGR activities to enhance utilization

A serious effort should continue to be made to characterize the germplasm and identify traits useful to breeders and farmers. Characterization could be done under field studies and also by using biochemical and molecular tools, preferably in ‘crop networks’ and ‘traits consortia’. Documentation and dissemination of evaluation and characterization data should constitute to be treated as an important component in effective utilization of germplasm. IPR and benefit sharing will become Increasingly relevant. Research should be undertaken to improve characterization and evaluation techniques, in use of biochemical and molecular markers in PGR characterization, diversity stratification procedures, methods for establishing

validity of core collection, improved methods of trait detection, etc. Development of low cost molecular techniques for characterization and DNA fingerprinting should be given high priority.

Introduction of useful agronomic traits, identified through characterization and evaluation studies, into locally adapted or elite material of wide genetic diversity and broadening of breeders’ working collections through incorporation of wide genetic diversity should be promoted at the crop-specific research centres in the system. Liberal credit sharing and incentives to plant breeders who undertake genetic enhancement should be considered important to encourage this activity. This would help in complementing the efforts with any possible direct benefits of varietal protection and royalty, etc. under the new regime of plant variety protection. On-line linkage of database of base collection and other PGR databases can bring more favourable results from genetic enhancement efforts.

Promoting development and commercialization of underutilized and niche crops

Several locally exploited, underutilized crops substantially contribute to household food and other subsistence commodities, and these have potential for more widespread use. Increase in their cultivation area locally could contribute to more production for food security and increased nutrition, particularly in areas where major crops are economically marginal. Therefore, along with further identification, conservation, research and development of these crop species, other aspects like the post-harvest processing and assessing the prospects of their marketing, etc. should also be taken up to increase the prospects of diversification in agriculture, increased food security, and improved farmers’ livelihoods/living standards.

Traditionally, several weekly markets, called haats, are organized by the rural farming and business communities from place to place, particularly in the tribal, remote and backward areas, to inter alia sell their agricultural produce. Few such formal markets, such as Delhi Haat, have also been promoted albeit on an experimental scale. The niche markets have been providing a definite source of variability in different genetic resource collecting missions. Realizing the need to promote on farm conservation and to improve farm income therefrom, efforts should be enhanced to organize these niche markets and to expand their scope in the peri-urban and urban areas. Inventory of items likely to be available in area-wise niche markets along with the information on traditional value of these commodities shall have to be developed to help popularize the niche products. The agrobiodiversity-rich remote areas/ communities/ tribals should be appropriately linked through on-line access to information on suitable agricultural markets and haais.

Supporting seed production and distribution

Farmers are generally constrained due to non-availability of wide range of quality seeds of traditional varieties, mainly because of lack of awareness, poor harvesting techniques, inadequate on-farm storage facility, insufficient means for multiplication of quality seeds and poor distribution system. Therefore, efforts should be made to strengthen the local capacity of farmers to produce and distribute quality farm-saved seeds (unbranded) of different crop species, including their landraces, farmer varieties, released varieties, etc., which may be essential for the diverse farming systems. Contract

farming for quality seed production of ethnic materials could be another option, which should be suitably explored through partnerships.

Comprehensive PGR information and early warning system

Realizing the fast emergence of the electronic connectivity and the speed and precision of data exchange, action should be taken to develop means and methods for identification and adoption of suitable technology and knowledge/information at the national, regional and local levels. Also, appropriate low cost, low volume technologies for compilation and exchange of data may be developed/adapted and standardized. Use of satellite imagery and GIS may be done to access, assess and disseminate information related to PGR.

Survey methods should be improved and refined to anticipate loss of PGR in target locations, determine the dynamics and population equilibrium of traditional resources, and study the underlining causes of their genetic erosion. Early warning systems should also be devised for the ex situ collections to enable timely intervention, regeneration and replenishments. The national PGR management system should take lead in facilitating the restoration of PGR in the wake of early warning.

Promoting education, training and public awareness on agrobiodiversity/PGRFA

PGR literacy and education are important at the grassroot as well as the intermediate levels. During the past 34 decades, PGR information and knowledge have increased significantly. This knowledge needs to be organized in simple texts in various Indian languages for easy understanding by different academic classes and social sectors. Training and periodic reorientation of PGR workers of different disciplinary background needs high priority. HRD is essential for understanding, making and implementing PGR policy at the national, regional and global levels. This activity must receive a high priority and also compassion.

Whereas traditional, ethnobotanical knowledge can be gathered from the innovations and indigenous practices by the farming community, it is important to reciprocate and make the farmers and communities aware about the increasing importance of PGR for sustainable use and posterity. It will also be important to covey the legal and procedural aspects of facilitated access, benefit sharing and IPR under the Indian law, as well as the related international developments. Cross-sectoral involvement for increased public awareness on PGR should be encouraged. Decentralized micro-planning should be done in conjunction with the institutions of local self-government, village panchayats, local biodiversity committees, self-help groups, etc., to help implement the PGR conservation and sustainable use programmes at local levels according to the duly required priorities. Mass awareness should be generated through various means, such as, literacy campaign, radio, television, short message servicing and print media, social system, eco-projects, etc., to enhance farmers’ cooperation for local activities on genetic resource conservation and improvement. Their participation should be encouraged in related regional and national activities/endeavor.

To sum up, the area of agrobiodiversity is huge and diverse. It may not be possible to explain it in relation to merely PGR or traditional farming systems or conventional agricultural/ horticultural/ farm husbandry practices or traditional knowledge on any other related components. The conservation aspects, under both ex situ or in situ

conditions, and issues of facilitated access for sustainable use also constitute merely a part of the overall subject of ‘agrobiodiversity’. Thus, the sum total of all the aforementioned components/aspects together with the huge traditional resources and knowledge developed and applied for specific or broader situations for various purposes has to be addressed under ‘agrobiodiversity’ at large.

Agrobiodiversity management is obviously affected by various direct and indirect concerns. For example, it would require efficient, effective and rational management of resources; legitimate access for their use on prior informed consent and mutually agreed terms; the application of equitable benefit sharing of the commercial benefits accrued; and the protection of IPR, where applicable.

Agrobiodiversity management also concerns the availability and use of relevant technologies, including the environmentally-safe application of biotechnology for use and application of various agrobioresources/genetic resources, and other related matters. Some of the questionable (on the grounds of morality and ethics) yet potential technologies for the future evolution of agricultural species and their ecosystems, like the Genetic Use Restriction Technology (GURT) or the more commonly known as terminator technology are also linked to this area of ‘agrobiodiversity’. The implementation mechanisms for the realization of farmers’ rights and equitable benefit sharing are sensitive issues that need a lot of input from various concerned quarters, and standardization over the time.

Hence, the students and the researchers in the area of agrobiodiversity/PGRFA must analyze and interpret each and every situation that they address, for its merits, demerits, potentials and prospects in a system wide system perspective on a short- medium- or long-term basis. This approach would help them in prudently, and judiciously addressing individual situations on case-to-case basis; as well as in securing, arranging and disseminating the significant and salient results of their studies/ research aimed at conservation, diversification, enhancement and sustainable use of agrobiodiversity and thereby development, and the human well being.