SOURCE_DOCUMENT: Chapter 25.pdf

25. Farm Machinery

Modernization of agriculture requires appropriate machinery for ensuring timely field operations, effective application of agricultural inputs, and reducing drudgery in agriculture. Traditionally, farmers in India have been using manual and animal-operated farm equipment but due to increased cropping intensity, this power is no longer adequate to ensure timeliness. The research institutions and industries together have helped the farmers in development and manufacture of suitable farm machinery to mechanize field operations. Though average farm holding size is only 1.32 ha (2001), which is further divided into 2.3 parcels yet medium- and large-farm-sized holders who constitute 6.4% of the total farm holders possess 37% of the total cultivable land with average size of holding of about 7.6 ha. These farmers are better equipped to utilize modern inputs for mechanization of agriculture. Even small farmers are using improved machinery on custom-hire basis wherever available in the locality.

Use of machines in agriculture

Traditional vs improved farm machinery

Traditional tools and implements, viz. bullock-operated country plough and bakhar for tillage; dufan or tifan, enatigoru and funnel and tube-attachment on country ploughs

as sowing devices; sickles, khurpi, spades and olpad thresher for harvesting, digging and threshing; and swing basket, Persian wheel (rahat), cradle pump for irrigation, etc. are popular in India (Table 25.1). With the financial incentives provided by the government to the farmers, use of electric or diesel engine-operated irrigation pumps, animal- and tractor-operated cultivators and disc harrow for seed-bed preparation; seed drill or seed-cum-fertilizer drill and planter for line sowing with fertilizer application; and mechanical power thresher and combine harvesters has also increased. Farmers have also adopted sprinkler and drip-irrigation systems in commercial crops. The resource-poor farmers could get the benefit of modern agricultural engineering equipment through custom hiring.

Impact of mechanization

Several studies have reported that the farm mechanization (i) increases cropping intensity, (ii) ensures larger area coverage and timeliness, (iii) increases farm labour productivity, (iv) increases crop productivity and profitability owing to efficient utilization of inputs, and (v) increases on-farm human labour marginally, but more in industrial production. Farm mechanization ensures saving in seeds, 15-20%; saving in fertilizers, 15-20%; increase in cropping intensity, 15-20%; increase in productivity, 10-15%; saving in time, 20-30%; and reduction in labour, 20-30%. However, level of mechanization in the country is still very low and only in few selected states. The constraints in promotion of mechanization are (i) small size and scattered holdings; (ii) poor economic conditions of the cultivators; (iii) increasing farm mechanization does displace labour in farm operations; and (iv) lack of repair and replacement facilities especially in the remote and rural areas that increases cost of repair and idle time of the farm machinery. Based on the investment in use of machinery and cost of human labour and draught-animal power, the mechanization index is only 15.22%; highest of 29% was recorded in wheat-crop. The analysis revealed that fixed costs accounted for 28 to 46%, and cost of human labour 23 to 34% of the total cost of production (Tables 25.2, 25.3). Increased cost of labour and poor yields are the major constraints that reduce the margin of profit or even results in losses.

Source: Cost of Cultivation of Principal Crops In India-2000, Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India.

Note: The weighted average of cost of cultivation (Rs/q) was computed taking into account the cost of cultivation of the crops and average yield in different states.

FARM MACHINERY

Note: Based on ratio of cost of use of machinery to the total cost of use of human labour, animal power and machinery; *Animate : human + animal

History of farm machinery development in India

The development of farm machinery in India started in the beginning of 20th century by adopting the technology used in European countries. The British officers in India initiated the introduction of improved machinery. In 1889, Watts and Kaisar ploughs, corn grinders and chaff cutters were introduced at Kanpur Experimental Farm in Uttar Pradesh. Horse-drawn and steam tractor-operated implements were imported during the latter part of the 19th century. These horse-drawn equipment were suitably modified by small-scale manufacturers to suit Indian draught animals. Attempts were also made to improve the designs of local and traditional implements by analysing the performance characteristics for their upgradation. Sardar Joginder Singh (1897-1946), Minister for Agriculture in the Punjab Government (1926-37), introduced the steam tractors in India in 1914 for reclamation of wastelands and eradication of kans, a coarse grass. Demand for tractors in the country was met through import until 1961; when Eicher Tractors Ltd and Tractors and Farm Equipment Ltd started manufacturing tractors with foreign collaboration.

With the establishment of Allahabad Agricultural Institute (AAJ), Naini, Allahabad, in 1942, the development activities in agricultural machinery got accelerated. Asa result, bullock-drawn Meston, Shabash and Wah- Wah ploughs were introduced in Uttar Pradesh, manufactured by the Agricultural Development Society, Naini in the early forties. The establishment of the Design and Development Centre at the AAI, Naini, with the financial assistance of Ford Foundation of the USA accelerated the development of farm machinery in the country. The spike-tooth thresher developed by the AAI with bhusa (bruised straw)- making arrangement revolutionized crop threshing. The ICAR in 1954, for the first time sponsored a scheme to conduct state-wise survey of existing tools and implements used by the farmers. The results were published in the Indigenous Agricultural Implements of India (1960). During 1960s, the ICAR also made serious effort to promote research and development on improved farm implements by establishing 17 Research Training and Testing Centres (RTTCs), one in each major state. Subsequently more R & D institutions or research centres were created to strengthen development of improved farm machinery. The ICAR then initiated an All-India Co-ordinated Research Project on Farm Implements and Machinery, and it has centres in most of the State Agricultural

788 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

Universities (SAUs) and ICAR Institutes, who are engaged in the development of the farm equipment based on the need of their region.

Growth in use of agricultural machinery

The Government of India in co-operation with State Governments helped the small farmers in adoption of improved bullock-drawn implements by providing subsidy up to an extent of 50% of the cost. The State Agro-Industries Development Corporations were established to provide logistic support for the manufacture and marketing of agricultural machinery, including custom hiring and servicing facilities. Although the utility of manually and bullock-operated equipment was established, the response of the farmers was selective in assimilation of these implements. The farmers in most of the states have accepted steel plough, cultivator, harrow, seed drill and plant-protection equipments. The levellers, graders and the seed-cum-fertilizer drills have also been accepted, but on a limited scale. Due to limited economic advantage, some improved implements could not replace the local alternatives but their use on custom hire basis has increased. Major success in assimilation of improved farm technology has been in the use of power- operated equipment. Tractor-drawn cultivators, disc harrows, disc ploughs, threshers, seed drills and sprayers have become popular and are being manufactured by a large number of industries throughout the country (Tables 25.4, 25.5). Use of power-operated machinery by the farmers has increased as this saves turn around time and improves quality of service. Due to higher initial investment in machinery farmers prefer to avail power-operated machinery (tractor, planting, transplanting, combine harvester etc.) on hire basis.

Source: Government of India, 1966, 1971, 1981, 1991 and 2003. Livestock Census Reports, Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Ministry of Agriculture, New Delhi.

Land-development machinery

It involves clearing of land, levelling and grading so as to perform field operations properly and apply seed, fertilizer or manure, and irrigation water uniformly. Axe, hoe, pick-axe, spade, crowbar and heavy-duty ploughs have come in use and are still in vogue where mechanization has not advanced. As the tractor became popular, the tractor- drawn scraper, leveller, terracer, float and smoother have come in use and are available in the market for large-scale mechanized land clearing, levelling, construction of farm ponds, and the laying of irrigation and drainage systems. There are bulldozers, excavators, dumpers and trenchers for laying subsurface drainage pipe. Laser-guided levelling equipment are being used in Haryana, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh.

FARM MACHINERY

Power source

; Source: Government of India, 1966, 1971, 1981, 1991 and 2003. Livestock Census Reports, Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Ministry of Agriculture, New Delhi.

Equipment for tillage and seed-bed preparation

Country ploughs, bakhar and patela are the most popular traditional implements for seed-bed preparation. Although tractors and power tillers were introduced in Indian agriculture, draught animals still continue to be used in arid regions, hill agriculture and by small farmers throughout the country for seed-bed preparation and bund making. The traditional animal-operated country plough although has low output and requires a number of tillage operations, it is still being used by farmers on small farms. Cultivator, disc harrow, mouldboard plough, puddler, disc harrow-cum-puddler, and patela harrow operated by animal are the improved machinery adopted by the farmers. Improved tractor-operated machinery, viz. sweeps, cultivator, disc harrows, mouldboard plough, disc plough, puddler and rotavator, are more efficient, and are being adopted. Roto-tilling combines primary and secondary tillage in one operation. It reduces the time in seed-bed preparation. Saving of 60-70% in operational time and 55-65% in fuel consumption with single operation compared to the conventional method of seed- bed preparation with separate ploughing and harrowing operations have been observed, besides conservation of moisture.

Seeding and planting machinery

Traditional methods of sowing include manual broadcasting, opening furrows by a country plough and dropping seeds by hand (kera), and dropping seeds in the furrow through a bamboo or metal funnel attached toa country plough (pora). In manual seeding, it is not possible to achieve uniformity in distribution of seeds. A farmer may sow at desired seed rates, but the inter-row and intra-row distribution of seeds is likely to be uneven, resulting in clumps of plants or gaps in field. The line sowing not only saves seed but also facilitates regulated application of fertilizers near the root zones. Besides, ithelps in easy control of weeds through use of mechanical weeders. The animal-drawn dufan (two-row), tifan (three-row), enatigoru and FESPO plough (all local sowing devices) are used by the farmers, as these cover more area and cost less. Multi-row traditional seeding devices with manual metering of seeds are quite popular with experienced farmers. For precise application of seeds and fertilizers, mechanically metered seed-drill and seed-cum-fertilizer drill operated by animal and tractor were developed and are being manufactured to suit specific crops in different regions.

The functions of a well-designed seed-drill or planter are to meter seeds of different sizes and shapes; place the seeds in the acceptable pattern of distribution in the field as well as place it accurately and uniformly at the desired depth in the soil; and cover the seeds and compact the soil around it to enhance germination and seedling emergence. Improved seed-cum-fertilizer drills are provided with seed and fertilizer boxes, metering mechanism, furrow openers, covering devices, ground drive system and controls for regulation of seed and fertilizer rates. Major differences in various designs of seed-drills or planters are in type of seed and fertilizer metering systems and furrow openers. Common types of metering devices used on seed-drills and planters are adjustable orifice with agitator, known as gravity feed; fluted roller; vertical rotor with cells; plate with cells (horizontal, vertical inclined); cup feed, and pneumatic planting. The designs of furrow openers of seed drills vary to suit the soil conditions of a particular region. Most of the seed-cum-fertilizer drills are provided with a pointed tool to form a narrow slit in the soil for seed deposition. Commonly used furrow openers are double-end pointed shovel-type furrow openers; pointed bar type (diamond- shaped); shoe type; and runner or sword-type openers. The Zero Till Drill with inverted “T’ type furrow opener is preferred where seeds are drilled directly into uncultivated seed-beds. The system offers the apparent advantage of timely planting, at reduced time, fuel and labour costs.

Organic manure, farmyard manure and green-manure application

Organic manures and farmyard manure (FYM) contain both major and minor soil nutrients in small quantities. These are applied in comparatively large quantities per unit area and have a direct effect on plant growth. Usually these are applied manually by the farmers and incorporated in the soil by ploughing. Deep placement in bands is more advantageous, which requires proper equipment . A bullockcart-operated farmyard manure applicator was developed at the Gujarat Agricultural University, Junagadh. Tractor-trailer type farmyard manure applicator was developed at the National Research Centre for Soybean, Indore. Green-manuring is defined as a practice of ploughing or turning undecomposed green plants into the soil with a mouldboard plough, disc harrow or rotavator for improving its physical structure and fertility. The spent slurry of the cattle dung from biogas plants, normally contains 6-8% solids, is also applied to the field directly through irrigation system or dried to a convenient stage and then spread in the fields.

Interculture and plant-protection equipment

The loss of grain yield due to unchecked weed growth is very high; the yield is affected up to 20-60%, if not controlled. Failure to control weeds may result in reduced or no yield. To overcome the problem of weeds, combination of mechanical weeding by use of improved weeders and herbicide application has proved to be advantageous in terms of reduced labour-hour requirement. Khurpi is the most versatile hand-hoe for removal of weeds, but it takes 300-700 man-hr to cover | ha. Use of long-handle wheel hoe and peg-type weeders reduces this weeding time to 100-125 hr. Bullock- operated weeder and cultivator are also used for control of weeds. Expandable cultivators are versatile for adoption in row crops of different spacings. Shovels and sweeps are operated as shallow as possible to prevent damaging the plant roots.

FARM MACHINERY

Different designs of low-cost hand-operated sprayers and dusters are available for plant-protection. Power-operated sprayers, aero-blast sprayers, tractor-operated air- assisted sprayers and ultra-low volume sprayers are also available commercially which can be used effectively for plant protection.

Harvesting and threshing machinery

Harvesting with a sickle followed by threshing with animal trampling barley, chickpea, peas, pigeonpea, coarse cereals and paddy is the most popular traditional system prevalent in the country. Self-sharpening serrated sickles, reapers operated by engine, power tiller and tractor were developed. Threshing with bullock trampling is arduous and time consuming. The mechanical threshers of varying power range (5 tolS Hp) are commercially being manufactured, which not only thresh grains but also provide good-quality fodder (bhusa) for the cattle feed. Farmers use the thresher on individual ownership basis or on custom hiring. More than 70-80% wheat, barley, chickpea, soybean, sorghum and pearl millet crops are estimated to be threshed by mechanical power threshers. Paddy crop is easy to thresh by beating, but losses are quite high. Pedal-operated paddy threshers reduce drudgery. These have become popular in eastern India. Raspbar-type paddy thresher causes less breakage to paddy stems, and thus straw can be put to better use. These threshers are popular in Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Kerala. Drummy-type, hammer mill-type and syndicator-type threshers are suitable for threshing wheat crop only, and they can produce fine-quality of bhusa. Raspbar-type, wire loop-type and axial flow-type threshers are suitable for paddy but they do not make fine straw. Raspbar-type threshers can also be used for threshing other crops, but farmers do not prefer this machine because it does not make fine bhusa and costs high due to its bulky size.

The combine harvesting has become popular where productivity is high harvesters are easily available on custom-hire basis, provided farmers do not have (or have limited) economic use of straw, as these are burnt or incorporated into the soil to increase organic matter. In regions where work force is not available in adequate numbers, and also to reduce the turn-around time to facilitate increased cropping intensity, harvesting with combine harvesters is in vogue. Tractor- operated and self- propelled combine harvesters are commercially manufactured in India. About 5,000 tractors and self-propelled combine harvesters are sold annually. A combine harvester is also manufactured in India with track type traction device exclusively for paddy crop. More than 48 manufacturers, mainly in Punjab, produce self-propelled and tractor- operated combines for harvesting. The farmers in other states have adopted combine harvesting mostly on custom-hiring basis. The entrepreneurs from Rajasthan and Punjab provide combine-harvesting services to the farmers in Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu. Most of the combines are suitable for harvesting wheat and paddy. The farmers use them for harvesting chickpea and soybean as well. The technical specifications have revealed that combines with 4.20 m (14 ft) cutter bar length and operated by 60-75 kW engines are the most popular- size. The combine harvesters with raspbar cylinder are used for wheat harvesting and straw is thrown back in the field. Straw combines are commercially available which collects the loose straw, cuts the standing straw and chopps into small pieces to make ‘bhusa’ . These are subsequently conveyed into the trolley attached behind it. For paddy,

pegs-type threshing cylinder is used. Row-crop rice and wheat combine harvesters (3-row and 4-row) of South Korean (Kukje) and Japanese type (Kubota) are being introduced in Indian market. These combines have provisions to chop straw into pieces before releasing in the field for incorporation in the soil, or the straw is windrowed in bunches or continuous band to enable farmers collect it for further uses. Straw balers can also be used to cut the standing paddy straw and also to collect the loose straw and make the bales which can be easily transported to paper industries, power plants etc.

Export of agricultural machinery

Today, India is recognized as a leading country in the world for the development and manufacture of animal and power operated machinery. The country is well equipped to manufacture general purpose tractor, agricultural machinery and specialized machinery, viz. combine harvesters, plant-protection equipment, drip irrigation and micro-sprinkler. India exported agricultural equipment worth $ 67 million in 2000; the share of agricultural machinery being 65.3%. As per the classification of Ministry of Commerce, Government of India, about 50 major agricultural machinery commodities (including spare parts) are exported to different countries (Table 25.6). Tractors have the maximum market share value, followed by hand tools. Export of tractors has increased to 43,533 in 2007-08. Submersible pump and tractor-operated

Note: The items are supplied to the countries in Africa, Bangladesh, Nepal and Sri Lanka, Japan, South Korea, Korea DP, PR China, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Pakistan, Thailand, the USA, United Kingdom, Italy, Germany, France, Romania, the Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland, Sweden, Canada, and Australia.

FARM MACHINERY

disc harrows are the other export-earning items. The USA has been importing tractors, ploughs, scraper, submersible pump, harvesting and threshing equipment, hand tools, mower and milking machine. The United Kingdom has also been importing Indian manufactured items, viz. mower, pickers for jute machinery, hand tools, parts of dairy machinery and bulldozer. European countries, viz. Italy (pickers for cotton and jute machinery), Germany (grader and leveller, seeder and planter, cleaning machinery, mower, picker for jute machinery), France (submersible pump, pickers for cotton and jute machinery), Romania (mower), the Netherlands (picker for cotton machinery), Spain (pickers for cotton and jute machinery), Switzerland (hand tools) and Sweden (dairy machinery), also import Indian agricultural machinery. Other countries, viz. Canada (cleaning or sorting machine, scraper, milking machine) and Australia (disc harrow, hedge and pruning shear, machine for production of soymilk or soy-products, and parts of dairy machinery), are also importers of Indian machinery.

Trends in farm-machinery design and development

Network for agricultural machinery design and development

Major initiatives in the development of equipment of farm mechanization was initiated in 1971-72 at the IARI through the ICAR sponsored All-India Co-ordinated Research Project (AICRP) on Farm Implements and Machinery, Production of Prototype and their Evaluation under different Agroclimatic Conditions. The ICAR also established the Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering (CIAE) at Bhopal in 1976 to address issues related to agricultural engineering. The CIAE co-ordinates research through network of research centres established all-over the country for development of location-specific technologies. Research in the area of farm machinery was further strengthened with the creation of other All-India Co-ordinated Research Projects on Power Tiller (1980), Utilization of Animal Energy (1987), Human Engineering and Safety in Agriculture (1994) and a National Research Centre on Reducing Drudgery of Women in Agriculture (1994). The All-India Co-ordinated Projects with the co-operation of local industries have developed improved machinery to suit local cultural practices. The Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India, has supported equipment for popularization through subsidy scheme. The prototypes are manufactured and supplied for frontline demonstration to the farmers.

Tillage equipment

Bed former, puddler, disc harrow-cum-puddler, cono-puddler, hydro-tiller and tool frame with attachment are some of the equipment developed under the ICAR Research and Development system. Animal-drawn helical blade puddler saves 30% labour, 46% operating time and 30% on cost of operation when compared with the conventional method of using country plough or tractor with cage wheels for puddling. Roto-tilling combines primary and secondary tillage in one operation, reducing the turn-around time. Saving from 60 to 70% in operational time and 55-65% in fuel consumption with single rotavation when compared with the conventional method of seed-bed preparation with separate ploughing and harrowing has been observed.

Sowing and planting devices

For precise application of seeds and fertilizers, mechanically seed-regulated seed-

drill and seed-cum-fertilizer drill operated by animal and tractor have been developed, and are being manufactured to suit specific crops and regions. For paddy transplanting, manual power tiller and engine-operated rice transplanters have been tested and evaluated. Two-row and six-row lowland manual rice seeders are useful for sowing pre-germinated paddy in puddled fields. Tractor-mounted direct rice seeder (9-row) is an attachment to the commercially available tractor-mounted cultivator for direct sowing of paddy in upland conditions. Manually-operated 6-row rice transplanter is suitable for transplanting of mat-type rice seeding in puddled soils in rows. Self-propelled riding type 8-row rice transplanter is suitable for transplanting mat-type seedlings. Tractor- mounted ridger seeder forms ridges and furrows and carries out sowing either on the ridge or in the furrows as desired. Tractor-operated semi-automatic sugarcane planter and sugarcane set cutter-cum-planter are also available for sugarcane planting.

Mechanical weeders

The peg-type dryland weeder is suitable for weeding and mulching in row crops with 225-450 mm row-to-row spacing, viz. groundnut, sunflower, safflower, soybean and sorghum. Single- wheel hoe and twin-wheel hoe are manual push-pull type weeder suitable for weeding crops having row spacing of 300 mm or more, viz. sorghum, soybean, maize, pigeonpea etc. The self-propelled weeders are fitted with small engines and consist of chassis, two driving wheels, air-cooled petrol-start kerosene-run engines, V-shaped sweeps and clutch. These machines are suitable for widely spaced crops viz. cotton, tapioca, sugarcane, grapes, coconut, arecanut and other orchard and plantation crops.

Plant-protection devices

The present trend is to apply concentrated pesticides by means of low-volume and ultra low-volume sprayers. This has been possible through the development of better formulations and special nozzles. Low-volume and ultra low-volume (ULV) sprayers, which require comparatively smaller quantity of water, are also in use. The controlled droplet application (CDA) atomizers require less than 15 litres/ha spray mixture and are easy to operate. Although new types of spray atomizers are available, the correct chemical formulations for these are commonly not produced. Hence, their use is limited to particular crop, pest or disease. Self-propelled high-clearance sprayer aeroblast sprayers are suitable for spraying on field and tall crops. The tractor-mounted orchard sprayer with air-assisted rotary atomizer has been found suitable for spraying of fungicides on small berries and mango trees up to 6 m height. The sprayer consists of a fluid tank, atomizer with hydraulic motor and a flow control valve. The atomizer blows the chemical up to the maximum swath providing uniform and efficient spraying pattern.

Harvesting and threshing equipment

Self-sharpening serrated sickle were developed with better material and design. It also required less frequent sharpening. Reapers operated by engine, power tiller and tractor have been developed and introduced for harvesting wheat, paddy, soybean, ragi and mustard. The self-propelled vertical conveyor reaper cuts the crop and conveys it to the side in vertical position for wind rowing. Collection of the cut crop for making

FARM MACHINERY

bundles is easy and it is done manually. It is run by 5 or 9 HP diesel engine. An exclusive straw collector and binder or straw combine harvester was developed to facilitate straw disposal.

Scientists led to the development of threshing mechanism with spike-tooth cylinder and aspirator blower mounted on the same shaft, which has since been universally adopted in most power thresher designs. Multicrop threshers suitable for threshing major cereals, oilseeds and pulses were developed. These threshers have provision to control concave clearance as well as threshing drum and blower speed independently so as to reduce grain breakage and improve cleaning. These are preferred for threshing oilseeds, viz. sunflower, soybean, and pulse, viz. pigeon pea. A high capacity pigeon- pea thresher has been designed which consists of automatic chain conveyor-type feeding mechanism. Only pod portions of plant bundles are fed continuously to the cylinder one after another through chain conveyor and the threshed bundles are discharged through other end after stripping and threshing of pods. Thus, intact bundles with long stem are obtained with increased capacity. The cleaning and separating systems are as per the conventional design of threshers having aspirator blower.To avoid accidents during operation of thresher, safety devices were developed, which helped in enactment of Dangerous Machinery (Regulation) Act. The low-cost hand maize-sheller, a simple device for removing kernels from maize cobs, can remove 16-24 kg grains from cobs in 1 hr. Women can also handle this sheller with equal ease. Similarly, rocking-type manual groundnut decorticator is very effective for shelling groundnut pods. About 60 kg groundnut can be shelled in | hr when compared with 5-6 kg by hand. Manually- operated cleaner, grader and winnower are effective for cleaning grains, and even small farmers have adopted these.

Farm equipment for dryland agriculture

The Indian agriculture is primarily a rainfed cultivation, with area under irrigated agriculture limited to less than 40% only. As most of the cereals, pulses, oilseeds and cotton are raised on these lands, they are important for the economy of the country. Crop grown on rainfed lands due to fluctuation in rainfall results in low yield. Further, improper management of resources due to inadequate power and equipment is one of the major constraints of farmers in rainfed areas to check yield fluctuations and to render stability to production. The farmers continue to follow traditional methods using indigenous equipment, by which it becomes difficult to achieve timeliness of operation with required precision. This leads to inefficient utilization of natural resources (soil, water, nutrients etc.), resulting in poor crop yields. The traditional field operations practised by dryland farmers, though time consuming, still persist because they are less sensitive to poor management than improved systems. The solution to future production advances from drylands through improved technology is tied up with the improved management of input resources using mechanization. The improved farm implements for rainfed agriculture include those for: (/) bunding to conserve soil moisture; (ii) deep ploughing for better intake and storage of rainwater; (iii) contour cultivation to reduce runoff and soil loss; (iv) use of low seed rates and contour sowing; and (v) interculturing for control of weed and to check evaporation of soil moisture. The ICAR has established Central Research Institute for Dryland Agriculture (CRIDA) at Hyderabad to meet the requirements of dryland agriculture.

Tillage

In drylands, where kharif crops are grown with rainwater and rabi crops are almost on residual moisture, tillage practices must be geared for conservation of rainwater and minimizing the loss of stored water. For this, concept of optimal or minimal tillage and mulching practices were developed. The tillage implements like mouldboard plough, chisel plough, disc-harrow, blade harrow, tyne cultivators and rotavators have been in common use by different categories of farmers. The extent of tillage requirements for various soil types to maximize the moisture conservation and crop yield were studied. Tillage before the onset of monsoon is advantageous for increasing infiltration. Ploughed area conserved higher moisture with 90-cm depth during summer as compared with unploughed area. Moisture conservation in the intensive tillage treatment at the end of dry spells was lesser when compared with the shallow tillage treatment. The tillage operations like ploughing loosened the top 10-15 cm of soil and increased the infiltration rate. To increase the total volume of water infiltrated under rainfall conditions, 2 options are available viz. an increase in storage or an increase in the infiltration rate.

Seeding and fertilizer application

During the last 2-3 decades, scientists have developed a number of seed-cum- fertilizer drills and planters matching location-specific needs of the farmers. These include single-row devices, viz. FESPO plough, drill-plough, plough-planter, ridge seeder etc., matching the needs of small and marginal farmers; and the implements viz. Reyala goru, ragi seed drill, Malviya drill, CRIDA two-row planter, CIAE seed- cum-fertilizer drill, CRIDA groundnut planter, CRIDA tractor-drawn planter, ICRISAT ferti-planter etc., matching the needs of medium- to large-farmers. A single-row, bullock-drawn FESPO plough has been developed at the CRIDA, Hyderabad, for seeding and band placement of fertilizer. The CCSHAU, Hisar centre has also developed a two-row bullock-drawn ridger seeder. The sowing is done on sloping side of the ridges. Fertilizer is placed in a band along with the seed. CRIDA Plough Planter, which is similar to drill-plough except the inclined plate mechanism to obtain the uniform intra-row spacing, that is crucial to minimize competition for nutrients and water, has also been developed. A Malviya seed-cum-fertilizer drill, which is a two- row machine with adjustable row spacings and sowing depths, has been developed at the Dryland Resarch Centre; BHU, Varanasi. The metering of seed is by flutted roller and fertilizer by vertical rotor over adjustable orifice.

Interculturing and weeding equipment

The interculture operation in a dryland crop is aimed at removing weeds and creating soil mulch that would conserve soil moisture. The most commonly used hand tool is a hand hoe (khurpi). Different institutions have developed various types of improved weeding tools and weeders. Most prominent among these is CIAE wheel hoe, having different sizes of sweeps and blades suiting to crop-row width and available power. The CRIDA, Hyderabad, has developed and tested two-row tractor-drawn blade harrow for interculture of castor and sorghum. Small hoe mounted on pipe frame is popularly used in Saurashtra region of Gujarat.

FARM MACHINERY

Improved farm equipment for women

Women constitute a major percentage of agricultural work force (31%). They continue to perform various farm operations using traditional tools and equipment, which cause a lot of drudgery. Digging of soil by women is commonly practised in hilly regions. Men and women are equally engaged in sowing operation, either behind the plough or utilizing funnel tube-sowing device. Men or women usually use sickle, khurpi, spade, country plough etc. for harvesting and digging. The fruits are plucked manually. Serrated sickles facilitate cutting and require less effort. The Research and Development Institutions in India have developed a good number of gender-neutral simple devices and equipment for crop production and processing. Manual dibblers and seed-cum-fertilizer drills have been developed, which not only save time but also improve the placement of the seed and fertilizer. A six-row manual rice transplanter has been developed and is being popularized in few states. A power-operated rice transplanter is undergoing extensive evaluation, which may be operated by women workers as well. Simple manual wheel hoe weeders operated by either sexes are available. These reduce the time to 25-110 hr/ha. These weeders are operated in standing posture and do not require bending of body, and thus reduce the drudgery considerably.

Power tiller, tractor or engine operated reaper harvesters are also available. Women may find it difficult to operate but, given the opportunity, skill can be developed in them for operating these machines. For harvesting mango, orange, kinnow, peaches etc. simple hand-operated telescopic gadgets are also available. Men and women both can operate the power thresher. Pedal-operated paddy threshers are also available and have become popular in Bihar, Orissa, West Bengal and Asom. These threshers are suitable for use by farm-women: Low-cost manual and power-operated shellers are available to sell value-added products. Since there are a number of high-speed moving components, adequate safety precautions need to be taken by women, who wear loose garments while handling power-operated farm machines. The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has already taken up a large-scale populatization of small tools/implements among rural women through the NATP. These tools/implements can be used with care in sowing/transplanting interculture and harvesting and digging operations.

Future research

Due to size of the farm holdings and socio-economic disparities, the farm machines adopted in India, are such that they utilize the labour force effectively. The objective of mechanization has been to introduce efficient farm machinery on individual ownership basis or on custom-hire services to ensure timeliness in farm operations, to increase the productivity of land and labour, reduce drudgery, to provide dignity of labour, and to improve the quality of farm produce. Due to higher initial investment in machinery, farmers prefer to avail power-operated machinery (tractor, planting, transplanting, combine harvester etc.) on hire basis. No worth while reliable data have been collected in the country in the use of machinery on custom hire basis. Information is also not available on quality of service or saving in timeliness factor. During the season (tillage and harvesting) farmers loose valuable time due to non-availability of machinery on custom-hire basis or breakdowns of farm machinery. Subject like ‘after

798 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

sale service’ ‘availability of genuine spare parts’, cost and quality of service etc. is yet to be studied.

Futuristic farm equipment

Some of the futuristic farm equipment are discussed here.

Roto-tilling combines primary and secondary tillage in single operation using rotovator, It reduces the time in seed-bed preparation. Saving of 60-70% in operational time and 55-65 per cent in fuel consumption compared to the conventional method of seed bed preparation with separate ploughing and harrowing operations has been observed, besides conservation of moisture.

Laser-guided levelling ensures better levelling especilly for water management in mechanized paddy transplanting.

The till-plant machine is a minimum tillage equipment capable of ploughing, sowing and applying fertilizer without prior preparation of seed-bed.

With strip-till-drill the seeds are drilled directly in a narrow-tilled strip in a single pass. It has the distinct advantage to loosen the soil in a band to allow effective crop root development, besides it avoids undesirable compaction of the soil in the crop rows.

Zero-till drills place the the seeds directly into uncultivated seed-beds with a specially designed inverted T- type furrow opener. This creates furrow groove with reduced surface exposure, thereby helping to maintain the in-groove humidity in a reasonably wet soil for better germination of seeds and emergence of seedlings.

The inclined plate-planter facilitates uniform placement of single seed in soil, and therefore it helps in saving costly seeds.

Pneumatic precision planter consists of pneumatic disk and suction type seed metering mechanism to meters single seed and places them in proper soil environment for better seed distribution and uniformity at pre-determined seed and row spacings.

Tractor-operated semi-automatic sugarcane-sett cutter-cum planter opens the furrows, operator drops the sugarcane through the chute, which is cut into required size of setts and places into the furrows and covers the furrows with soil besides pesticide and fertilizer are applied.

Self-propelled rice transplanter that uses mat-type seedlings and finger-type seedlings picking mechanisms facilitates rice transplanting operation.

Two-rows and four rows tractor-operated, semi-automatic vegetable transplanter with manual feeding of seedlings to the picker assembly by the operators facilitates vegetable transplanting automatically.

Plastic mulching conserves soil moisture and controls weeds under adverse conditions. In plastic mulching, usually bed is prepared and plastic is laid by a machine (tractor or power tiller operated). These are suitable for vegetable transplanting.

In a high-capacity pigeonpea thresher only pod portion of plant bundles are fed continuously to the threshing cylinder through a chain conveyor for stripping and threshing of the pods. The thresher is equipped with aspirator blower and a set of oscillating sieves for cleaning and grain separation.

FARM MACHINERY

* To overcome the problems associated with the manual cotton pickings, mechanical cotton pickers are being adapted under Indian conditions. The

mechanical cotton picker is a self-propelled two-row unit provided with spindle- type picking mechanism.

Precision agriculture — Crop modeling and crop planning

Precision agriculture enables the farmers to select the cropping system and inputs requirement based on the agro-climatic requirements. The GIS has potential to integrate spatial and non-spatial data in the field of crop modeling and crop planning that include identification and assessment of water availability; irrigation scheduling; study of agricultural cropping pattern; land-use allocation; evaluation of crops; monitoring of crop growth; crop stress and crop influenced with diseases; and crop acreage and production estimation. Equipment fitted with real-time sensors and process information system allows using inputs like fertilizer, pesticides and herbicides selectively. The scientists need to develop real-time sensors to measure soil and crop properties yield parameter and quality of products that will decide selective use of inputs. The real time sensors are required for measurement of soil moisture, soil texture, compaction, soil porosity, soil fertility level and soil nutrients requirement, crop canopy, crop health, crop maturity etc. Real-time crop-moisture sensors used in combine harvester may help in auto adjustment of threshing speeds of the drum to reduce the grain damage and other losses. :

Farmers’ training

Modern innovative high-tech farm machines have unique sophisticated features. The farmers may find these machines highly complex to operate without proper training. Even simple adjustment and routine maintenance may be difficult to carryout by them. Even the extension engineers with KVKs and State Departments may have to be exposed to these complex machines before they are able to conduct demonstrations. There are limited training facilities available for agricultural machinery to the farmers, which may have to be expanded. The e-learning through internet may be a powerful system to provide training to a large group of farmers and extension functionaries. The ‘e-learning’ training package modules may have to be developed by research institutions, which could be made available to selected centres in the country as Virtual Training Modules on Improved Farm Machinery.