SOURCE_DOCUMENT: Chapter 40.pdf

40. Intellectual Property Rights

We live in an era of increasingly knowledge-based economies where intellectual property rights are an invaluable tool. Intellectual property rights (IPR) are legal rights that subsist in tangible creations of the human mind and fulfill certain established criteria. The power of mind to reason and create is intangible as it cannot be touched and measured. However, a creation from intellectual pursuits may result in a tangible product, which is clear and definite. Such real product, or process or design, or systematic arrangement of idea may be having either monetary value or moral value or both. In agricultural research and technology development efforts, for example, intellectual investments may be as crucial as genetic or other resources.

Innovativeness is the engine of creativity; it leads to intellectual creations by researchers. The results may be important both as personal achievements and products of economic investments (for commercialization). In this context, any grant of IPR can protect the interests of creators and their employers in that creation. Further, although intellect has an abstract rather than material value, tangible creations of the human intellect can be immensely valuable and therefore IPR can be useful to fully utilize the value of these tangible creations. Therefore, in practical terms, a cost benefit analysis may be important in ventures involving IP. Also, a policy decision has to be imperative that may focus on the understanding that IP in certain kinds of information or innovations is beneficial to society as a whole. Such utilitarian arguments in favour of IP have dominated the debate of justifications for IP. These arguments emphasize that the social costs that may accrue due to grant of exclusive rights over products of human innovation and denial of free access to these products are balanced by the social benefits of the encouragement given to innovators by these exclusive rights leading to rejuvenated interest and investment in R&D. The advocates of stronger IPR regime believe that taking any risk of investing in an idea that might fail would have to rely on a promise for some reward, if successful, and hence, the IP of persons in the inventions should be protected as their IPR.

The industrial sector has been considerably affected by the developments and concerns related to IP. However, in so far as IP in agriculture is concerned, it has not been seen congruently with industrial property in terms of rights on the intellectual creations. For instance, the rights granted on new plant varieties have been softer options than patents. Also, a control over the commercialization of intellectual creations in agriculture, such as plant varieties, may be difficult because of their biological nature as these can be propagated for further use without the requirement of any know- how from the owner.

Intellectual property rights

IPR are legal rights that exclude third parties for certain duration of time from exploiting the protected subject matter without authorization of the right holder. These rights are territorial in nature, and are applicable within the boundaries of the country

1459

granting any such rights under the relevant domestic law in force from time to time. However, governments are bound by certain Treaties and Conventions to uniformly apply some basic provisions related to protection of IPR in their jurisdictions. (refer pp. 1461 -1467).

Dur; ing the term (duration) of an IPR, no one will be authorized to use the protected material unless he/she gets a license from the right holder. Licenses for commercialization may be given on exclusive or non-exclusive basis. Unauthorized use of a work or product protected by IPR in a defined territory constitutes infringement of the right. The IPR laws provide for payment of compensation for damages by the defaulter, and may also provide for liability for penalty and punishment. (There are different forms of IPR, refer pp. 1467-1471).

One basic assumption in the grant of IPR is that the innovator/ creator should be encouraged, at least for a limited term, by the grant of exclusive right, for two reasons, (i) for ensuring appropriate compensation to him/her by way of that right, for his monetary and intellectual investments in a particular invention, and (ii) for encouraging advancement of R&D pursuits in the area in which the protected IP is subsisting. On the expiry of the term of protection, the protected technology would enter the public domain and may be utilized by all. This is true in case of patents, copyrights and designs. However, trademarks if maintained can be protected indefinitely. The right holder would not enjoy the privilege any more to exclude others from getting commercial benefits based on the hitherto protected process/product. Thus, in so far as agriculture is concerned, it is not correct to think that an IPR protected genetic resource cannot be utilized by third parties for enterprise/commercial purposes forever. Ifa genetic resource is IPR protected once, the material will have to automatically enter the public domain at the end of the protection term, become generic and freely used by all.

Another important aspect of IP rights is that no one can claim exclusive rights on a material that is already in public domain. Therefore, it is important that all such informations, which are vital in the public interest, like that related to food security, environment or traditional knowledge for the use of indigenous and traditional resources are well documented and codified, so that they are available to the examiners of IPR applications in various countries. This would be especially helpful in case of patents where applications claiming right on inventions based on materials from public domain can be rejected based on such documentation. A Recent laudable development in this area has been the Traditional Knowledge Digital Library. The TKDL is the result of a joint project between five Indian government organizations, including the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) and the National Institute of Science Communication and Informative Resources (NISCAIR). This library is an attempt to bring together aspects of India’s traditional knowledge, including ayurvedic and unani medicines and yoga postures, and make them available to examiners of patent applications throughout the world. Indigenous Technical Knowledge for Agriculture and allied sectors has already been documented by the Council into five volumes Tunning into 2,657 pages.

In the modern world, comparative advantage in the economic sector is led by information and competitiveness in R&D and enterprise. It is because of this increased importance of information that IPR is becoming important globally. This area in

1460 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

agriculture has been generating increasing attention at the global level. Before taking up various global developments affecting IPR in agriculture, it will be useful to consider some unique aspects of innovativeness in agriculture.

Innovativeness and IPR in relation to agriculture

Agriculture has been and continues to be the mainstay of Indian economy. Exploitation of minor forest produce particularly for fodder and plant-based medicines still continues as a practice in the rural and remote hilly areas. In the settlers’ habitats, around 10,000 years back, primitive agriculture was the mainstay, which has evolved with the underlying processes of domestication, intensification, diversification and value addition. However, the economic balance sheet is determining further evolution of the present-day industrial and commercial agriculture.

Like other sectors, agriculture has been facing problems related to property disputes relating to land, source of groundwater, farm power and machinery, storage godowns, etc. However, there were hardly any disputes for the ownership of a crop variety or the source of planting material. These biological inputs were considered common heritage of the farming households/communities at the local level and that of the humankind on a wider plane. The farming communities freely exchange seed or voluntarily contribute their biological resources to meet the seed requirements of a needy neighbour or some distant communities at least in situations of emergency, like natural calamity. The trends have gradually diminished giving way to enhanced consideration for the private nature of resource ownerships, and the economic value of agriculture. Exclusiveness vis-a-vis IPR has obviously gained increasing importance. Nevertheless, the nature of IP rights (being private rights), the spread of proprietary control in research tools, and uncertainty in the limits of ownership require complicated negotiations to proceed with any joint research efforts. This also increases the transaction costs for innovation. Altogether, the conduct of agricultural research is being impacted by IPR concerns and consciousness.

Innovativeness in agriculture

Increased human intervention in agriculture over time has played an important part in its evolution. The tribal and farming households made conscious selections in variety of plants based on their preferences and liking, saved seeds of these selections, and perpetuated such seeds/cultivars over the generations. Intellectual investment was made by several successive generations of farmers in the inherited seeds and methods of cultivation/management to make improvements in the seed resources and processes related to their use. This led to new ideas making further domestications and increasing production of desirable/preferred domesticates. Also, new agricultural goods and products were invented to meet human needs and various other requirements. Such traditional knowledge and resources in the present day context constitute the basis of further improvements for wider adaptability or those for specific environments in well-adapted genetic backgrounds.

The improvements in productivity, production, diversity and quality in agriculture have been made possible with inter alia, selective exploitation of crop species for food, fibre, shelter, medicines, rituals, aesthetics and other miscellaneous uses. During

1461

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 1461

the course, plants and their products from agriculture, which were freely available and liberally exchanged, got property tags of their respective owner-persons, villages, communities or states. Such proprietary confinements led to bartering, trade and commerce, which necessitated development of customs, formal practices, codes of procedures, regulations, or relevant laws and their enforcement.

Agriculture provides the basis and also the resources/raw materials for a large number of diverse industries, goods and commodities for trade. Such goods and commodities or the processes related to their manufacture or use may merit protection through IPR that will ensure exclusive economic returns. Here, it may be observed that whereas an IPR is an enforceable right in the creation, use of raw materials for such creations could have been subject to payment of cost and/or compensation. On the same principle, it has been argued that when the farmers’ conscious selections or their traditional knowledge for the development or use of these selections are to be utilized as raw materials in agricultural research and development, there should be the consideration of compensating the farmers, at least for the commercially successful products, for their equitable right in those resources. However, the commitment in this area is not consistent on a global level, particularly in relation to facilitated access and benefit sharing in agriculture in conjunction with the application of IPR. It is, therefore, important to observe and understand various issues that concern IPR related matters in agriculture, how these are being addressed at the global and national levels, and the future perspective.

Intellectual property right in relation to agriculture

Like in other fields of technology, research and technology development in agriculture also involves intellectual property. The innovativeness and creativity of researchers result into some new product(s) and/or process(es) or some improvement in the existing ones. Such new inventions in agriculture may be publicly available from the beginning thereby benefiting society but not providing any particular monetary reward to the innnovator since anyone can copy and use the invention. Alternately, exclusive rights may be granted in the form of IPR for a limited period. Such right- protected technologies can be commercialized either directly by the owner or by licensing to other(s) for the benefit of the end-users and, at the same time, for economic gains to the owner.

Broadly, IPRs are protected under law in different forms, which can be categorized into industrial property rights, copyrights and others. The industrial property rights include patents, designs and trademarks; the copyright also includes related rights for the presenters, producers and disseminators of the right protected IP; and the other forms of IPR include geographical indications, undisclosed information (trade secrets), topographies of integrated circuits, etc. Out of all, the forms of IPR most relevant to agriculture are patents, trademarks, geographical indications and the plant variety protection systems. The holistic picture would also include use of copyrights and trade secrets in agriculture whereas designs and topographies of integrated circuits may also be applicable in some appropriate cases. The standards of IPR, as described in the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement) under the auspices of the World Trade Organization (WTO), will be discussed later.

1462

Global developments concerning IPR in agriculture

The focused global developments concerning IPR in agriculture perhaps began in the 1960s. In 1961, a small group of European countries met for the first time in the International Convention of the Union for Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV) to discuss the role of private plant breeders and the protection of their right on the new varieties developed by them for commercial use. Thus, the crucial issue of IPR protection in agriculture was successfully put into the system for global consideration. However, at the national level, a law on protection of plant varieties was already in existence in the USA in 1930.

The UPOV evolved with three versions of the Convention, namely, UPOV 1961/ 1972, UPOV 1978, and UPOV 1991. Meanwhile, the provision for protection of IP rights in plant varieties had also led to apprehensions like the sharing of parental stocks in further breeding programmes. This issue was addressed under the United Nations, Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) umbrella, in the form of an International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources ([UPGR), signed in 1983.

The IUPGR was administered by the FAO Commission on Plant Genetic Resources (CPGR). The Undertaking declared all genetic resources as the common heritage of mankind and advocated that these resources should be made freely available for research/breeding. One of the revised agreed interpretations to the IUPGR clarified that free does not mean free of charge but it means without restriction. Other revisions led to recognition of the plant breeders’ rights, the concept of farmers’ rights, and the sovereign right of nations on their plant genetic resources, held as the common heritage of mankind.

The IUPGR regime successfully reined the world agricultural scenario for a decade. However, with the shifting global emphasis from agriculture to environment culminating at the Earth Summit, the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) was signed in 1992 in Rio de Janeiro. The CBD took over the charge of handling inter alia issues of access to biological resources and technology, and equitable benefit sharing.

During 1986-1993, agriculture was also included for the first time in the Uruguay Round of world trade negotiations for the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). This round of multilateral trade negotiations brought intellectual property, textiles and services under the trade disciplines of the GATT together with agriculture for the first time. This was perhaps the most significant development that changed the world focus on agriculture, primarily from the angle of trade, intellectual property, and services. The Uruguay Round culminated with the Ministerial Conference at Marrakesh in 1994, which favoured the surge of the World Trade Organization (WTO).

The WTO, established on 1 January 1995, is the custodian and implementing authority of many Agreements that have bearing on agriculture. These include the Agreements on Agriculture (AoA), Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS), Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT), and Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). The IPR related aspects of the new regime are predominantly covered under the TRIPS Agreement. This Agreement provides a package of uniform provisions in IPR matters for adoption and application by all member countries. The WTO also provides dispute settlement measures and penalties for non-compliance. The package of agreements covered under the WTO was required to be implemented by the member countries in appropriate legal and administrative frameworks within stipulated time

1463

frame. For example, developing countries, including India were required to bring in the provision of product patent in their system by 1 January 2005. Table 40.1 shows various global developments that affect IPR in agriculture directly or indirectly.

Review process set in under the WTO

+ TRIPS Agreement covered Biosafety Protocol signed under the CBD

+ Addresses concern for biosafety over the introduction of transgenics

International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (ITPGRFA) signed

. The revised IUPGR as endorsed by the FAO Council, in harmony with the CBD Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety enforced on 11 September 2003

+ The first legally binding international agreement, under the CBD, that governs the transboundary movement of living modified organisms (LMOs), also known as genetically modified organisms (GMOs), resulting from modern biotechnology

2004 International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (ITPGRFA)enforced on 29 June 2004

+ Vital in ensuring the continued availability of the PGR for food security and sustainable agriculture

1464

Justification for legal protection of intellectual property rights

Intellectual property is one of the most controversial areas of contemporary law in the developing world. The justifications for IP vis-a-vis its legal protection range from natural law justifications based on Lockean and Hegelian thought (Bentley, L. and B. Sherman, 2001. Intellectual Property Law, Oxford University Press, London, NY) to justifications based on utilitarianism and economic efficiency (Besen, S. M. and L. Ruskind. 1991. An Introduction to the Law and Economics of Intellectual Property. Journal of Economic Perspectives 5(3). Most modern Intellectual Property Laws are based on arguments of economic efficiency and social utility and seek to strike the optimum balance between the interests of creators and users of IP. IPRs give temporary exclusive rights to inventors and creators over their works so as to allow them to seek rent for use of such inventions and works by others. This takes information, which is essentially a public good characterized by non-exclusivity into the domain of private property. Supporters of IP cite the incentive effect and the rising cost of investment in R&D to justify expansion of this private domain into new areas.

A problem resulting from information from innovators being a public good is free riding whereby competitors can utilize the information without any cost to them and this in turn leads to innovator of the product/process having difficulty in deriving value of the goods through sale and dissemination. On the other hand innovators could try to keep that information secret to avoid competition which could prevent this information from ever entering the public domain. This entails the creation and enforcement of IPR as a balancing act whereby innovators/creators get fixed term exclusive rights in exchange for full disclosure of information so that after expiry of such fixed term the information can be used by all. In some cases IPR can reach untenable levels whereby the owner of IP becomes a monopolist of discoveries or ideas, as opposed to inventions or tangible works. Such monopolies act as a disincentive to future creators. Therefore, IPR must be controlled through effective public policy decisions and appropriate exceptions. Rational grants and effective enforcement of IPR are thus clearly important and essential.

TRIPS Agreement and Indian scenario on intellectual property rights

TRIPS Agreement

The TRIPS Agreement is considered a landmark in the evolution of an international intellectual property protection system. The Agreement is unique as for the first time one agreement covers all major areas of IP. It combines the basic non-discrimination principles covered under the GATT with the substantive IPR provisions laid down in the erstwhile major international agreements, conventions and treaties, covering the protection of IP in different forms. These include the Paris Convention (1883), in the field of patents and the Berne Convention (1886) in the field of copyright. TRIPS also provides for the application of WTO dispute settlement mechanism to disputes under this agreement. This mechanism ensures enforcement and provides teeth to the international IP protection system in contrast with the Paris and Berne Conventions that lacked any specific dispute settlement mechanism.

One pertinent point to keep in mind is that the IP laws have territorial limits and are national in character and reach. This means, for example, that a patent granted in the

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 1465

1465

US cannot be enforced in India and vice versa. Even the international patent applications filed under the multilateral Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) have to be eventually pursued as a national application in each elected jurisdiction. Therefore, to harmonize provisions under the national IPR laws with a balanced international IP protection system, the TRIPS agreement has laid down standards, which are to be followed by each WTO member-country in their respective national laws. There have been some attempts, for example in the European Community, to have a Community Patent valid for all members of the regional group/union of countries, but that has not happened in practice till now. An outline of various provisions under the TRIPS agreement is given in Table 40.2.

In relation to the review for TRIPS as set out in Article 27.3(b), and also broadly along with the WTO review mechanism, the Doha WTO Ministerial 2001 had categorically decided that the members would not initiate complaints under the TRIPS Agreement but encourage its implementation. It was decided to implement the Agreement in letter and spirit. The Doha declaration on public health also allowed members to issue compulsory licenses on patented drugs to encounter public health emergencies, and export to countries lacking manufacturing capacity is also allowed in cases of public health emergencies in the recipient country. The developed country members were also required to submit detailed reports on the functioning, in practice, of the incentives provided to their enterprises for the transfer of technology. It was also felt essential to work out mechanism for ensuring monitoring and full implementation of the obligations under the TRIPS. India has amended its patent legislation to bring it in conformity with India’s obligations under TRIPS.

Indian scenario on intellectual property rights

For understanding of the existing practices in India refer to the Indian Patent Office site at the internet at http://www.patentoffice.nic.in. Any invention, whether product or process (method) or an improvement of any one of the above inventions, may qualify for patent protection. However, there are certain exceptions which will be discussed further in the following sections. Literary, artistic, dramatic or musical works, computer programmes, performances, sound recordings can qualify for copyright protection. Visual symbols, which may be applied to the articles of manufacture or commerce to show the origin of goods, can also be protected as trademarks. Goods known by the identity of region or place of origin can be protected as geographical indications. Visual appeal as to the features of an article, such as its shape, configuration, pattern or ornament can get design protection.

1466

Three-dimensional configuration of the elements and interconnections embodied in an integrated circuit product, and formula for a chemical compound, a process of manufacturing, treating or preserving materials, a pattern for a machine or other device, or compilation of information like a computer programme or a list of customers, design drawings, etc., which is used in one’s business and which helps to obtain an advantage over competitors who do not know or use it, can all be protected as the intellectual property of their creators.

Different forms of Intellectual property rights

Various provisions related to different forms of IPR (Standards of IPR) as covered under TRIPS Agreement are listed in Table 40.3. The different forms of IPRs, which concern agriculture more than the others, are discussed here.

TRIPS Article Provision

(Table 40.3 Concluded)

Article 36 Article 37 Article 38

Protection of undisclosed information

Patents

A patent is considered to be the strongest form of IPR protection. It is granted by a State to person(s), whether natural or legal person, for an invention made by that/ those person(s). The three essential characteristics of an invention, to qualify for legal protection by grant of patent, are (i) the invention as claimed in the patent application should be novel/ new when compared to information already in the public domain (prior art), (i?) non-obviousness or involvement of an inventive step is a requirement that when considered from a perspective of a person who is aware of developments in the field of the invention, the invention should not be obvious (something more than a mere workshop improvement), and (iii) industrial applicability is a requirement for utility or usefulness in the industry in some form. Thus, the inventions that have no clear use or that produce technology having negative use may not be admitted for grant of patent. Another critical requirement is that the application for a patent should clearly and sufficiently describe how the claimed invention can be achieved. This is known as the requirement for sufficiency of disclosure.

The broad outlines of these concepts are same the world over, yet there are differences in the extent and interpretation of the terms. For example, novelty is judged from global perspective and global search of prior art. However, novelty in the USA is relative novelty which means that written prior art for the determination of novelty to be searched anywhere in the world, but confines the search of oral prior art within the US borders. On the other hand, in the countries of Europe and many other jurisdictions the requirement for novelty is absolute, thereby meaning that the search is worldwide for both written and oral prior art. A patent is granted for a term of 20 years from the date when an application for the patent is made. In consideration of public order and morality, patent can be denied for inventions that are obscene or immoral. For example, a genetic use restriction technology (GURT) may not be considered for patent grant by the patent office of a country unless some specific use is claimed and is admitted. In India, patent grant on GURT is, however, prohibited under the law.

Apatent entitles the owner of the right to exclude others from making, using, offering for sale, keeping, selling/vending, importing or exporting the invention or its product for the term of the patent, that is 20 years from the application date. The initiative to enforce a patent has to be taken by a patent owner or his assignee or licensee. If they see any infringement or a potential infringement, they should notify the infringer that it is a protected invention and he should desist from the act of infringement and enter into a licensing contract for the use of the patent or its product, or face the legal consequences. In most innocent or trivial cases, out of court settlement is expected but in a legal suit, the act of infringement will have to be proved before the court of

1468

1468 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

law. Further, mere grant of a patent does not empower the owner of the invention to commercially use it at will. Rather, he has to seek market approval under the relevant law and also clear other regulatory obligations, such as biosafety clearance of compulsory labeling, where applicable. This adds up to the cost of technology generation, testing and verification of regulatory standards and may affect market competitiveness.

Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT): Application for a patent on the same invention should be made in several countries where business interest prevails. However, the cost for getting and enforcing patents in many different countries is exorbitant. To simplify, economize and make more efficient the system of patent protection for inventions, particularly in foreign countries, there is an international treaty, administered by the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). It is known as Patent Cooperation Treaty and is open to members of the Paris Convention 1883. The PCT has more than 117 members including India and it facilitates and extends cooperation for, (i) filing patent applications intended to get patent protection in various PCT member countries, (ii) international search of prior art, (iii) examination of patent applications, and (iv) publication of patent applications for use in the national phase.

a patent application is filed either in the International Bureau Office (located in the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) Headquarters), Geneva, or the respective national patent office. The PCT application is subjected to an international search of prior art. This service is provided at the some patent offices which are recognized as International Search Authorities, including USA, EU, Australia and China. The applicant has to pay requisite fees, which vary from one search office to other. A written opinion on patentability of the invention is sent to the applicant along with the search results. An applicant can also request the international application to be examined but this is not mandatory. The International Bureau publishes the patent application. An applicant may then enter the National Phase and apply with due fees to the concerned country patent offices as per their respective rules and procedures for grant of Patents. In the national phase, the priority date (date on which novelty and inventive step are assessed) of the patent application will be the date of filing PCT application or another priority date that has been already admitted in the PCT application. The published PCT application will be entertained by all PCT member countries and no fresh patent document will be required for examination except for the translation of published PCT application in the official language as required by the respective patent office where applicable.

The patent systems of various countries can be divided in to the First to file system and the First to invent system. Most countries including countries in the EU and India follow the First to file system, that is, a person who files for a patent with the patent office first is entitled to a patent irrespective of whether he is the first inventor or not. On the other hand, the US Patent Office follows the First to invent system, which implies that only the person who is the first and original inventor shall be entitled to the grant of a patent. Efforts are now on to harmonize the procedures even further and negotiations under the auspices of WIPO are ongoing so that practice of patent offices worldwide is more harmonized, making patent prosecution simpler and more cost- effective.

The TRIPS Agreement provides member states with some flexibility to exclude

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 1469

1469

certain kinds of inventions from patentability based on the public policy of that member state. For example methods of doing business, computer programmes as such, methods of medical treatment of humans or animals; essentially biological processes for the production of plants or animals are excluded from patentability in jurisdictions such as Europe and India. The Indian Patents Act also excludes methods of agriculture or horticulture, plant and animals from patentability.

Indian scenario

The Indian Patents Act, 1970, as amended by the amendments in 1999, 2002 and 2005, together with the Patent Rules, 2003, is presently in force. The Controller General of Patents administers grant of patents along with other provisions of the Act. Plant varieties are not patentable in India. However, in accordance with the options provided in the TRIPS, these can be protected by a sui generis system.

With amendments of 2005 in the Indian Patent Act, product patents are now granted in the country in accordance with the TRIPS Agreement in all fields of technology. Therefore, new molecules and drugs are now patentable in India. Also, patents can be granted for a process for curative, prophylactic, diagnostic, therapeutic or other treatment of plants to render them free from diseases and pests. However, sometimes there may be a very narrow line between a non-patentable essentially biological method for production of plants and a patentable process which is not “essentially biological”.

If a patent application refers to biological material that is not publicly available or achievable from the description in the application, as being essential to achieve the invention then the applicant is required to deposit such biological material in a recognized depository by the filing date of the application and to provide details of the deposit in the application. Moreover, the Indian Patent Act also requires the applicant to disclose the source and geographical origin of the biological material in the specification, when used in an invention.

Therefore, it is important to review the exact interpretation given to exceptions to patentability and understand the techno-legal nature of a patent application while drafting a patent application.

Important steps for acquiring and maintaining patents

Filing patent application: It may be filed at the Patent Office located at Kolkata or any of the branches located at Delhi, Mumbai and Chennai, depending upon the place of residence of the applicant or headquarters of establishment in case the applicant is not a natural but legal person. The application must be filed on the prescribed Form and it should be made along with the. prescribed fee.

It is possible to file a Provisional Application or Complete Application. The provisional application entitles applicant to a Priority Date for the invention claimed without filing Complete Specification and Claims for that invention. “Claims” are that part of a patent application, which describe the monopoly sought by the Applicant. However, the complete application will have to be filed within 12 months of filing the provisional application. No additional fee will have to be paid for the complete application filed subsequent to the provisional one.

The Patent Office will issue receipt of fees and also an application number to each

1470

application received, which will become referable number for all purposes pertaining to the invention covered under that application. The patent application numbers are conspicuous for each of the Office or branch where the application has been filed. Thus, for example, if an application has been filed in Delhi or Mumbai then it must have DEL or MUM, respectively, in the application number.

Within one year of filing an Indian application, it is possible to file further applications in India, in other countries which are members of the Paris convention or a PCT application claiming priority from the Indian application. Therefore, further examples describing working of the invention can be added at this stage and the costs for filing applications in all jurisdictions of interest can be delayed for some time while preserving the date on which novelty and inventive step of the invention will be assessed.

Examination of patent application: Examination of patent applications is not done automatically according to the current practice but a separate application for examination on a prescribed form has to be made along with the prescribed fee. The Patent Office may accept the application or return it to the applicant with an Examination Report conveying the objections which need to be addressed for bringing it in order for acceptance. The first examination report also sets a deadline within which all the objections raised by the examiner have to be met and the application has to be placed in order for grant.

Publication: A patent application will be made public usually around 18 months from filing and grant of a patent by the Patent Office is also published in the Official Journal of the Patent Office.

Opposition to patent: Opposition to the grant of patent by third parties can be filed at the Patent Office. An opposition can be filed both pre-grant (after publication of application but before grant) and post-grant (within one year of publication of grant in the official journal).

Decision on patent grant: Decision on grant of patent will be made by the Patent Office in cases when either there is no opposition or if there is any public opposition, the same has been successfully countered. Patent grant will be confirmed by issuance of document under the Seal of Controller General of Patents.

Annual maintenance of patent: Patent has to be maintained by the grantee (holder) with the payment of prescribed fee. Such maintenance fee may be paid annually during the term of the patent or well in advance. Rate of fee will be different for different years.

Trademarks

A trademark is a sign or mark or combination of signs or marks that establishes the goods or products or services of one establishment and also distinguishes these goods or products or services from those of the other establishments or competitors. When such marks are applied to services they are also known as service marks. Any entrepreneur may use a trademark without its formal registration and when it is established in the market on goodwill and sustained use, its owner can enjoy the legal benefits under common law. For example, such trademark is protected by law against unfair competition. However, a trademark can also be registered under the trademark law. The latter enjoys a stronger form of legal protection. The holder of a registered

1471

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 1471

trademark has the right to use the trademark and exclude others from doing so without authorization and also to sue the infringer for damages and compensation. The trademark registration may be renewed indefinitely in India after every 10 years. Article 18 of the TRIPS Agreement provides for renewal for registration of trademark at least every 7 years but for an indefinite period. A trademark, to qualify for registration, should fulfill certain conditions, for example, (i) it must be distinguishable, (ii) it should not be deceptive or misleading, that is, it should not be confusing with another trademark, and (iii) it should not violate public order or morality. The official register of trademarks maintains entries of all registered trademarks and the respective goods to which these are commercially applied.

It is desirable to register the trademark as soon as possible to protect investment in a trademark. However, in cases where a business establishment already has a fairly well known trademark in the market, it should fairly advertise the trademark along with the product(s) for which it is used. The advertisement should also suggest users of the product to be beware of the imitators of the trademark or the product being sold under that trademark. In case any report of infringement or deception is received from the market, the owner of trademark can find out the source of supply of the duplicate product and take action against the infringer. Third party compensation may also be claimed for payment to the innocent buyer of duplicate product using the registered/ trusted or similar trademark.

Trademarks are identified by the symbols ™ (not yet registered) and ® (registered). It is important to always use these symbols while referring to trademarks. Some examples of famous trade marks are “Wikipedia®”; “Oracle®” and “GODREJ®”.

Indian scenario

The Trademarks Act, 1999 is the law governing trademarks in India. Section 2(1)(zb) of the Act defines trademark as a mark capable of being represented graphically and which is capable of distinguishing the goods and services of one person from those of others and may include shape of goods, their packaging or combination of colours or any combination thereof.

Therefore, while patents represent ownership in the subject matter of an invention, trademarks signify the interest of the trademark’s owner in the mark itself irrespective of the goods that bear the mark. A trader, however, cannot claim exclusive proprietary right over any word or symbol. Descriptive words, surnames and geographical names are not prima facie registerable. Moreover, a trademark may be removed from the register on the grounds of non-use. Section 9 of the Act provides grounds for refusal of a trademark, that is, (i) the lack of distinctiveness, (ii) the descriptive nature, and (iii) for being the mark that has been customary in the established practices of the trade.

Application for registration of trademark is made to the Registrar Trademarks on prescribed form and along with the payment of prescribed fee.

Industrial designs

An industrial design is the ornamental or aesthetic description of an article or object, which may be 2- or 3-dimensional, and which is mainly important for its visual appeal in the market. This includes pattern or lines, or colour or any combination of these. Any description of function or utility attached to an industrial design will disqualify it

1472

for protection under the law. The creator of the design has a legal right to seek the design protection so that it can be distinguished in the market and also its unauthorized use or imitation can be discouraged.

The holder of a registered industrial design can make exclusive use of that design and also desist others from using that design. No one can give that or substantially the same design to its goods without reaching an agreement with the owner of the design and the infringers can be sued. Protection of an industrial design can also be done under copyright law as work of art, which entitles the owner with the reproduction tights; and, under some circumstances, a design may also be protectable under the law of unfair competition.

Indian scenario

The Design Act, 1911 has been repealed and replaced by the Design Act, 2000. The Design Rules 2001 give effect to the Act in harmony with the TRIPS. A technical amendment of the Design Act, 2000 was further made in 2003 to streamline the governance of design registration under the Act.

Application for registration of design is also made to the Controller General of Patents, Designs and Trademarks on prescribed form and along with the payment of prescribed fee.

Copyright and related rights

The oldest international convention concerning copyright is the Berne Convention, 1886. The creators of literary and artistic works, including scientific books, other compositions, computer databases of text, audio, video or multimedia sets, sequences, dramatic and musical works, etc. may seek lawful protection of their creations. The copyright may be implied from the date of creation without registration, or it may be registered under the law. With the advancement of science and technology, copyright law has been extended to cover creations in various forms of worldwide communication, including the internet and cyberspace. As mentioned earlier, novel and aesthetic designs can also be protected by copyright although there is a separate provision to register them under the protection of industrial designs law. Copyrights can also be available on the arrangement of gene sequences. The term of protection for copyright extends beyond the date of expiry of the original creator and it varies from country to country. This term is usually 70 years from the death of an author or from publication for the USA and European countries, and 60 years for India.

A holder of copyright may enjoy three types of legal rights, namely, (i) the reproduction right or the right to authorize or prohibit others to copy or reproduce the copyrighted creation. This reproduction right is applicable for the various forms such as publication or sound recording or visual/audio-visual recording; and, it is also applicable for public performances, broadcasting, translation or adaptation; (ii) the economic right to sell or license the right conferred by the copyright (The copyright holder may agree to enter into a licence contract, on an exclusive or a non-exclusive basis); and (iii) the moral right, which allows the holder to claim authorship, or to oppose changes to the original creation on the grounds of distortion of the original idea or a harm to the creator’s reputation. In case of an infringement of a copyright, the original holder of the copyright may sue the infringer. But, in cases where the

1473

owner of copyright has already entered into a licence contract for an exclusive licence, the licensee may have to infringement suit for damages/compensation. Nevertheless, the original holder can still sue the infringer on the grounds of moral right.

Related rights: The creations protected by the copyright law are also affected by another set of rights, known as Related Rights. These rights are given only in the performances or presentations and not on the original creations. There are three categories of the beneficiaries for the related rights, namely, (i) the performing artists, for example actors, of stage drama or television shows or films, which give visual effect to a creation of a copyright holder or the musicians, which similarly give melodious audio effect to the musical compositions, (ii) the producers of sound recordings or video recordings, such as audio or video cassettes or compact disks (CDs) or digital video disks (DVDs), and (iii) the broadcasting organizations of radio or television programmes. The duration of the related rights as per Rome Convention, 1961, is 20 years and according to the TRIPS Agreement, it is 50 years from the date of first fixation or first production or first broadcasting of the respective related rights.

Other considerations for copyrights: The basis of copyright law is the idea/ expression dichotomy, which means that what is protected is the expression of an idea in a tangible form and not the abstract idea itself. Unlike Patent or Trademark law there is no requirement for registration for obtaining a copyright, which subsists automatically from the date of creation. The TRIPS Articles 9 to 13 specify the minimum standards for the protection of copyright.

Indian scenario

The law governing copyright in India is the Copyright Act, 1957 as amended by Copyright (Amendment) Act, 1999. As per the law, acquisition of copyright is automatic, which does not require any formality. However, with reference to any dispute relating to ownership of copyright, registered copyright would be helpful. The certificate of registration of copyright and the entries made therein serve as prima facie evidence in a court of law.

All applications for copyright are made in the prescribed form along with the prescribed fee to the Registrar of Copyrights, Copyright Office, New Delhi.

Geographical indications

A Geographical Indication (GI) is a sign or mark, which is attributed to a good of any category, say agricultural good, manufactured/industrial good, etc. Origin of a GI is not attributed to a business house, rather it is attributed to a particular geographical region, territory or locality in that territory, where it has its production, economic and cultural relation/origin attributed to people of that geographical region, territory or the locality in that territory. Another term, appellation of origin, is also used to describe a good as having originated from a particular geographical region. All appellations of origin can be registered as GI’s but the difference is that all registered GI’s may not be the appellations of origin for the respective goods.

A GI, when attributed to a good, describes that good as having originated (manufactured) from a particular geographical region, territory or locality in that territory; and its origin is also attributed to the particular conditions, climatic or geographical or the social involvement, of that geographical region, territory of locality

1474

in that territory. The appellation of origin is, however, attributed to the origin (production) of the respective good from a particular region because of its particular geographical or climatic conditions.

Registration of GI's is the concern of the association of stakeholders or agencies responsible for the protection of rights of stakeholders of these goods covered under the GI's. There are two registers for the registration of GI's, (i) the register of goods protected under the GI, and (ii) the register of users of the protected GI. Entries in the second register can be made at different times on the request of the association or the agency who has registered the good, to include any new eligible user of the protected good on a commercial basis.

For protection of a GI, first, it has to be protected in the country of origin and then separate application has to be made in the individual countries where protection is required. Under special protection clause (Article 24 of TRIPS Agreement), all WTO member countries shall provide protection to GI of certain goods (spirits and wines). GI Protection to these goods is granted on the basis of their being well established for a fairly long period.

The term GI was first used in the TRIPS Agreement and is considered broader in meaning than the terms appellations of origin and indications of source that were used in the earlier WIPO treaties. Articles 21 through 24 of TRIPS contain the provisions regarding GI. Examples of GIs range from Champagne from Champagne district in France, Scotch whisky from Scotland, to Parma ham from Italy.

Indian scenario

The Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration and Protection) Act, 1999 together with the Geographical Indications (Registration and Protection) Rules 2003 provides the mechanism for protection of GIs in India. Section 2(1)(e) of the Act defines GI as an indication which identifies goods as agricultural goods, natural goods or manufactured goods, as originating or manufactured in the territory of a country or a region or locality in that territory where a given quality, reputation or other characteristics of such goods are essentially attributable to its geographical origin, and in case where such goods are manufactured goods, one of the activities of either the production or of processing or preparation of the goods concerned takes place in such territory, region or locality, as the case may be.

The Act broadly provides for the registration of GI of Indian goods, including agricultural goods (plants and plant varieties or produce), the registration of authorized users of such registered Indian GI goods, and the registration of GI of foreign goods in the territory in India where these goods are to be commercialized. Application has to be made along with the prescribed fee to the Registrar of Geographical Indications, Chennai, or respective regional offices as per the territorial limits notified under the Act. Examples of GI applications from India include DARJEELING tea, BASMATI rice, KANCHIPURAM silk saree, ALPHONSO mango and KOHLAPURI slippers.

Major issues concerning geographical indications

Protection of Basmati rice from India and Pakistan as geographical indication became a major issue with several pros and cons. The issue whether Basmati is a GI is still unresolved internationally. The reputation of Basmati may be inextricably linked

1475

to its region of origin in India and Pakistan but it can be treated as GI only when it is registered under the law. It is important to understand that in legal sense, protecting GI is not about protectionism but free and fair trade.

Trade secrets

The protection of trade secrets has historically been covered by the law relating to unfair competition. However, the Paris Convention, and now the TRIPS, has brought it in the realm of Intellectual Property Law. Trade secrets are generally considered to be information recognized to be valuable to competitors, not generally known in the trade, acquired at some expense or effort by its owner, who makes reasonable efforts to keep it secret. Article 39.2 of TRIPS defines a trade secret as an information that is secret in the sense that it is not generally known among or readily accessible to persons within the circles that normally deal with the kind of information in question, has commercial value, and has been subject to reasonable steps, by the person lawfully in control of the information to keep it a secret. Article 10 bis of Paris Convention covers the protection of trade secrets, and Article 2(1) of TRIPS obliges member countries to comply with Articles 1 to 12 and 19 of Paris Convention.

WTO member countries fulfil the TRIPS obligation according to the kind of legal system that they have in place. While civil law countries like Germany and Japan have statutory protection for trade secrets, in common law jurisdictions like UK and India, trade secrets are protected by tort, Breach of Confidence or Contract Law. There have been debates that trade secrets may be one of the means through which traditional knowledge can be protected. However, separate negotiations are going on at the WIPO platform to determine multilateral agreement in respect of genetic resources, traditional knowledge and folklore.

Unfair competition

Certain acts or practices that are not considered honest practices for carrying out business or trade lead to unfair competition in the market. Although unfair competition is not directly a form of IPR but it hinders smooth application of exclusive rights granted under most forms of IPR. Legal action against unfair competition is provided under the Paris Convention and the TRIPS Agreement. Different categories of unfair competition may be considered as follows: (i) making or causing confusion as to the products or services or the production or commercialization activities of a company or a business house; for example a product X in the market has a label made like an international reputed house, (ii) misleading the public by making certain allegations or at least indications as regards the method of manufacturing of a product, its quality or quantity or any other factor; misleading for services is similarly considered unfair competition, e.g., telling or indicating that a product of a competitor has been fried in beef tallow instead of vegetable oils or that unlike others we pack in 500 g packs rather than packs of pound (454 g) at the same price; (iii) making discrediting false allegations for the products or services or industrial or commercial activities of an enterprise, e.g., giving an advertisement that Our sweets are made of full-cream milk unlike the product of X company which is of toned milk, without substantiation or proof; (iv) disclosing and unfair use of other’s trade secrets, unlawful acquisition and use of trade secrets by companies or unlawful disclosure of trade secrets by employees

1476

1476 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

or others; (v) taking advantage of other's achievements, such as unfair use of someone's well established trademark; causing confusion with other's trademark to take business advantage or acts causing dilution or damage to other's trademark, also, free riding such as unfair reproduction of copyrighted materials or pirated audio and video cassettes and CDs; (vi) comparative advertisement, such as that given in item (ii) or in general a spate of international advertisements and counter advertisements by business giants, indicating other's product without mentioning it.

Hybrid rights (de jure) in intellectual property

The pace of technological change over the last few decades has forced IP law into unknown areas and hard cases, straining the capabilities of courts and legislatures. For example, computer software, genetically engineered life forms, databases, internet etc. constitute such new areas. These and other issues forced a searching re-examination of many of the premises of IP system [Besen, S. M. and L. Ruskind. 1991. An Introduction to the Law and Economics of Intellectual Property. Journal of Economic Perspectives 5(3)]. According to legal experts, the three main types of Hybrid Rights today are Database Right, Utility Model or petty patents and the Plant Breeders Rights. A utility model is a registered right which confers exclusive protection for a technical invention. It resembles a patent in that the invention must be new and must display a measure of inventive achievement though frequently the level of inventiveness required is not as great as it is in the case of patents. Unlike patents utility models are granted without a prior search to establish novelty and inventive step. This means that protection can be obtained more rapidly and cheaply but that the protection conferred is less secure. The term utility model is a generic term which refers to subject matter which hinges precariously between that protectable under patent law and sui generis design law. Utility model protection is alternatively referred to as petty patent in Australia, and utility innovation in Malaysia. India does not have a system for granting this form of rights.

Databases did not qualify for traditional Copyright protection as they lacked requisite originality necessary for literary works. The hybrid rights created for protection of databases in the USA and Europe only require that a substantial amount of effort is put in by the creator of the database to qualify for protection.

Plant Variety Protection/Plant Breeder's Rights are also a kind of hybrid rights. These may also be considered as subset of patents as these are mentioned under TRIPS Article 27.3(b), which deals with patents. Nevertheless, some features of such protection are unique for plant varieties and quite different from patents (The plant variety protection is described and discussed in a separate section).

There have been arguments that traditional knowledge should also be protected by a sui generis law instead of trying to fit it into the traditional IP categories, and the intergovernmental negotiations to this effect are going on at present.

Intellectual property right on plant varieties

The protection of plant varieties is part of the IP system. The International Convention of UPOV (Table 40.1), provided for a uniform system of plant variety protection (PVP) for the first time in the 1960s although protection of vegetatively propagated plant varieties except potato/tuber crop is admissible under the US law

1477

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 1477

since 1930. The TRIPS Agreement, 1995, endorsed a sui generis system of PVP, which the countries may opt for instead of granting patents on plant varieties. TRIPS referred to PVP in the chapter on patents. However, it does not fit into the classical IP rights. Prior to the acceptance of Mendelian theory of genetics, the production of varieties was seen more as an art than a scientifically informed activity. This was reinforced by the fact that there were technical problems in describing plant varieties in a way that met the requirements of patent law especially the inventiveness threshold as most breeds were obvious (Bentley, L and B Sherman, 2001. Intellectual Property Law, Oxford University Press, London, NY). There are some fundamental differences in the patent and PVP systems for IPR protection on the plant varieties, which may be observed in Table 40.4.

Source: Mainly adapted from Jordens, 2000.

Article 27.3(b) of the TRIPS Agreement provides that members may exclude plants from patentability. However, members are required to provide for the protection of plant varieties either by patents or by an effective sui generis system or by any combination thereof. TRIPS does not define what an effective sui generis system is and it also does not mention UPOV but most sui generis legislations in existence today follow the UPOV model (UPOV 1978 or UPOV 1991). One example is the

1478

European Community Plant Variety Rights, which is a regional plant variety protection mechanism for the European Union whereby a single application can be made and a single granted PVP right covers all member states of the European Union.

The right conferred in the plant variety protection system is also called Plant Breeder’s Right (PBR). It is different from rights given through a patent in many respects. It is a weaker right; however, it is also easier to get. There are more exceptions to PBR, such as researcher’s/breeder’s rights and farmer’s exemptions, than what is available under the patent system.

The requirements for acquiring IP right in a PVP system, are Novelty, Distinctness, Uniformity and Stability (DUS); and, a distinct Denomination. Distinctness is a weaker requirement as compared with non-obviousness (inventive step) in the patent system. Thus, even cosmetic breeding may lead to grant of PBR provided the distinctness in the new variety can be established. The novelty requirement for PBR is from the commercial viewpoint rather than from the point of view of use/application of new technology. Novelty is not lost by prior use but only by prior sale or disposal. Trials of the variety not involving offering for sale or marketing shall not affect the right to protection. The fact that the variety has become a matter of common knowledge in ways other than through offering for sale or marketing shall also not affect the right of the breeder to protection (UPOV 1978 Article 6).

IP protection is granted to new varieties of all genera and species of plants as per UPOV 1991. Varieties of forest plant species and non-cultivated economic/medicinal plants also fall under the scope of UPOV system of IP protection. However, a transitional arrangement of 10 years from joining UPOV 1991 was provided for the countries that ratify the Convention. In practice, nevertheless, protection is granted to varieties of those species that are notified under the national law. A country, having joined UPOV 1991, had to notify, in 10 years, all plant species, including even uncommon species, if an application is made for seeking PBR on a new variety of that species at a given point of time. The statistics of number of PBR titles granted under the UPOV system have indicated that there is highest coverage by varieties of ornamental plants, followed by rice, wheat, maize, soybean, and then other horticultural crops.

Under the UPOV system of protection, or that under the country laws developed by following the UPOV framework, protection/right will be eventually granted over a candidate variety if (i) the DUS criteria are clearly met with, (ii) the novelty, from commercial point of view, is verified, or in case of an objection to the contrary, the same is established, and (iii) the denomination is accepted, that is, either no objection is received in the national system or if there is any objection, the same is suitably and acceptably modified.

The criteria of distinctness and uniformity can be verified either from the breeder’s data or the grow-out DUS tests. However, there may not be any specific criterion, which could establish stability of the variety absolutely. Rather, it will be a matter of judgement by the PVP examiner. The stability of a variety cannot be simply judged in one or few years/seasons of testing. Therefore, judgement of examiner would be based on its verification in several ways. For example, by the documentary examination of information submitted by the breeder, the conduct of DUS tests by the official agency or a designated test centre.

1479

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 1479

Indian scenario

In conformity with the approach that most of the developing countries followed, and in accordance with the options available under the TRIPS Agreement, India has opted for a sui generis system for the IPR protection on plant varieties. The law will be governed by the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmer’s Rights Act, 2001 (PPV&FR Act, 2001). This Act envisages providing protection to new plant varieties, extant varieties, including farmers’ varieties and the varieties of common knowledge, and also Essentially Derived Varieties (EDV). In order to qualify for protection, a variety will have to fulfill the criteria of distinctiveness, uniformity, stability, novelty and a distinct denomination. However, novelty will not be essential for extant/farmer varieties or varieties of common knowledge. There will be no IPR protection for a plant variety that carries genetic use restriction technology (GURT), like terminator gene, in its genetic make-up. All applicants will have to file an affidavit stating that the candidate variety does not carry any GURT.

In the Indian swi generis PPV&FR system, any citizen or group of citizens of India or governmental organization or non-governmental organization (NGO) or firm formed or established in India has the right to make a claim for benefit sharing from a commercialized protected variety on their own behalf or on the behalf of farmer’s community/group in case the said commercial variety is an EDV and has been developed by using their variety as a genetic resource in breeding programme. The Act also requires disclosure of origin of genetic resources used. Such disclosure of origin and equitable sharing of benefits may be considered important/essential to address the growing concems of biopiracy and exploitation of knowledge of traditional communities. There is already an example of such an attempt, which was made to obtain PBR in Australia on two varieties of chickpea that were placed in an international gene bank located in India (Watal, J. 2001. Intellectual Property Rights in The WTO and Developing Countries. Oxford University Press, London, NY). In relation to this particular case, however, the applications were subsequently abandoned.

To assure a continuous availability of the protected variety for commercial purposes, in public interest, there is a provision in the Act that the National Authority can grant compulsory license to third parties on request. The authority may provide such license for a determined period when breeder/institution/licensee causes non-supply or short supply of planting material of the variety or charges prohibitively high prices for such planting material. Reasonable remuneration to the right holder will be rewarded at the time of grant of compulsory license. Further, to expedite disposal of legal disputes related to the Act, a Plant Variety Tribunal will be established under PPV&FR Act, 2001.

The Indian sui generis PVP system allows farmer’s customary rights to be enjoyed under the national Act. Accordingly, there are elaborate provisions for the farmer’s tights under the PPV&FR Act, 2001. It recognizes the various roles of farmers as breeders, conservers/preservers and cultivators, either directly or indirectly. The age- old contributions of traditional, rural and tribal communities in discovering and developing farmer’s cultivars and landraces are also recognized, and there is legal provision to reward them for these contributions through a benefit sharing arrangement, which will be decided by the National Authority established under the Act. A national gene fund will also be established and managed by the national authority for the realization of farmer’s rights and benefit-sharing arrangements.

1480

Farmer’s rights under the PPV&FR Act, 2001 also include their traditional rights to save, use, share or sell the farm produce of a variety protected under the Act provided that the sale will not be done for the purpose of reproduction of variety under a commercial marketing arrangement and the designated brand name (the denomination used by the PBR holder) is not used. The farmers also enjoy right to claim compensation for under-performance ofa right protected variety from its promised level under defined production conditions. Protection is given to farmers from legal proceedings related to alleged infringement and they are excluded from paying fees in any legal proceedings in the Tribunal and Higher Courts.

Filing of applications for PVP

The Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmer’s Rights Authority is now functional and based in New Delhi (See website: http://www.plantauthority.gov.in). Applications are being accepted for most crops (detailed list of all varieties, DUS test centres and testing guidelines can be found on the aforementioned website). Around 284 applications for new plant varieties, over 900 extant variety applications and around 9 farmers, varieties applications currently appear to be going through prosecution at the Authority. Of these, 40 extant varieties have been given the Certificate of Grant.

The application for registration of a variety is to be made in the prescribed form along with a completed Technical Questionnaire and the prescribed fee. Requests for DUS testing have to be filed and specified quantity of seed samples along with prescribed fees have to be deposited with the request. Other specific requirements may include, (i) filing of affidavit for absence of GURT (terminator technology) in the candidate variety, (ii) filing of the performance limits of the variety under specified environmental conditions, and (iii) declaring as to the origin/acquisition of the genetic resources used in the development of the variety, etc.

The term of protection varies and is 18 years for trees and vines and 15 years for other crops. For extant varieties the term of protection is 15 years from the date of

notification of that variety by the Central Government under section 5 of the Seeds Act, 1966.

Issues and concerns: National Laws and the UPOV Convention specifically exclude R&D activities from the scope of title-holder’s rights. In terms of farmer’s exemption elsewhere, in Europe, small farmers are allowed to use farm saved seed without any payment. Others are also allowed to do so but on payment of equitable remuneration. In terms of impact of IP rights in plant varieties for further research, there is hardly any evidence to show that investment in breeding programmes has increased due to PVP. In fact, increase in the rate of release of new varieties might have been a part of the wider appropriation strategy of companies rather than being impact of IP protection on varieties. Nevertheless, the IP rights on plant varieties would definitely give the owners a competitive edge over their competitors.

Another area of concern in relation to PVP is the role of private and public sectors in the advancement of R&D in plant varieties. In this context, the trends show that private sector investments are dependent on commercial significance of an endeavour. Therefore, public sector research, particularly in developing countries, always has a major role to play. It will be important for them to develop their medium to long term varietal development strategies in order to meet the national food and nutritional

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 1481

security needs, and at the same time, they should rationalize the IPR portfolio management approach in order to realize the benefits of IP protection regimes.

IPR and biotechnology

Innovations in varietal improvement technology have been influenced by advances in modern biotechnological approaches. As compared with the conventional breeding approaches, the biotechnological approaches usually involve more human intervention both extensively, in the system perspective, and intensively, at the individual steps. The processes and products of biotechnology are being presented as inventive subject matter that requires protection of IPR. For example, the identification, isolation and characterization of genes, their cloning and transfer through man-made methods to other related or unrelated taxa may result into processes/products that qualify for IPR protection. Biotechnological research is also surrounded by some public policy concerns, such as biosafety and environmental safety, and even a challenge for the logic of applying patent law in the field of biotechnology.

However, on the other hand, plant biotechnology has been considered as being capable of successfully producing plant varieties that may, (i) reduce the crop losses occurring due to various biotic and abiotic stresses, (ii) reduce the post-harvest losses, (iii) be more nutritious, (iv) be suitable for use in value-added food products industry, or (v) hyper-accumulate toxic metals from soil and water, thus mitigating industrial pollution and contributing to a cleaner environment. To promote biotechnological applications in agriculture to achieve these goals, it would be important that a system of IPR protection is established/developed. But, at the same time, there is need that the products qualify for their value for safe cultivation and safe use. In particular, one needs to know answers for questions like what is the nature of a genetic modification and whether the new product is risk-free or not. And, if not, what are the environmental or biosafety risks that may be expected and what are their threshold limits? For a biotechnological product to be commercially released, it would be important to ascertain that the potential risks from the product do not exceed the threshold limit. In other words, the product should be safe and risk-free for releasing in the environment or for commerce.

The case of patents in the field of biotechnology, in particular, is surrounded by some controversies, which may relate either to the technology or the protection of IPR. For example, controversies may arise with regard to, (i) risks and safety issues, (ii) scientific queries, particularly in the nature of transformation, (iii) role of patents in encouraging innovation, (iv) inefficiencies and waste of resources due to competition in innovation, and (v) the desirability or otherwise ofa broad scope for patent protection.

Some believe that broad scope for patents is desirable as it allows the inventor to plan and further develop his invention whereas a patent which is too narrow in scope would be futile as others may invent around it. However, according to another viewpoint, competition and rivalry are socially preferable and that broad patents hinder innovation and lead to misallocation of scarce R&D resources.

IPR in biotechnology face yet another issue, which concerns the blurred invention/ discovery dichotomy. Much of biotechnology involves discoveries, like (i) the genetic basis of various biological functions, or (i/) the organisms, each having one or more interesting attributes, and so on. However, genes that have been discovered in nature,

1482

when characterized, isolated and purified, are claimed as inventions. Due to this blurred dichotomy, the decision to grant patents on genes has been controversial.

IPR on biotechnological inventions also raises a related but quite distinct set of issues, which concerns equity. Northern Firms are accused of pirating and patenting biological material and traditional knowledge from the gene-rich developing world for profit, without fair and equitable sharing of benefits or the appropriate transfer of new technologies as called for by the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). In this respect, CBD Article 19 has made elaborate provisions, giving way to both IPR and equitable sharing of benefits for the applications of biotechnology. WTO review mechanism has also kept non-IPR issues such as environment and food security on its agenda for future negotiations.

IPR and genetic resources, bioprospecting and biopiracy

IPR and genetic resources: There are several different aspects to the link between access to genetic resources (GR) and IPR in respect of the sharing of the economic and other advantages that their utilization generates. The GR, whether held ex situ or occurring under in situ conditions, are likely to have been altered by human intervention for certain characteristics, which will not be found in natural populations. In certain cases, national legislations provide protection to GR. For example, it may be required by the national law to mention the source of genetic material used in a given invention achieved through access to GR and traditional knowledge (TK). The amended Patents Act, 1970 in India requires making such disclosures in the patent applications.

The obligation to mention in patent documents the source of biological material and traditional knowledge, however, sets off wide-ranging and often contentious debate. It reflects the importance of the material, moral, and sometimes religious/sacred interests at stake. It also highlights the practical applications that were made possible due to GR and TK in pharmaceutical, chemical and agricultural research.

Bioprospecting and biopiracy: Survey of biological resources from their in situ conditions for evaluation and use for specific economic purposes may be termed as bioprospecting. Research based industries, such as pharmaceutical industry, have keen interest in bioprospecting, and it is an immensely capital-intensive activity. Traditional knowledge of local communities is highly useful for bioprospecting. The bioprospector will save time and resources and also one can be more specific and focused due to prior information of traditional knowledge as well as potential biological resources. Further, the use of traditional knowledge in bioprospecting activities has potential to bring down costs substantially.

The results of bioprospecting are likely to sometimes bring good fortune to the industry. Their IPR protection is, therefore, considered important. However, if such rights are granted without any acknowledgement of the contributions of the traditional communities developing that traditional knowledge, or the country of origin that has sovereign rights on these resources, this should be considered as being against the principles of equity. Such concerns have led to raising allegations of biopiracy. However, with judicious interventions by the national governments, some patents of this nature have been revoked. In USA, for example, the patents on uses of turmeric and neem were revoked and the patent on basmati rice was substantially altered to exclude objectionable claims.

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 1483

1483

It is not difficult to revoke patents for which objection as to novelty of claims has been lodged and there is an acceptable proof of prior art. However, the patents challenged for obviousness need a lot of supporting data from many sources and even from fresh experimentation. In fact, as already mentioned, the US Patent Office does not consider oral traditional knowledge from outside its boundaries as being the prior art. To counter these problems, global efforts are being made to document and codify traditional knowledge of gene-rich developing countries so that patent examiners of developed countries have access to such information at the time of examining patent claims involving use of traditional knowledge.

IPR and traditional knowledge

The traditional knowledge (TK) of human beings over generations that is associated with the discovery and development, preservation, management and sustainable use of resources occupies a prominent place in terms of innovations in biotechnology. Therefore, there is a serious public debate as to the sharing of benefits that will accrue due to the application of TK in IP. Also, with the advent of biotechnology and genetic engineering and simultaneous destruction of habitats, protection of resources and the TK related with their use has become immensely valuable. The gene-rich developing world is also rich in associated TK whereas most of the new research on this knowledge and its increasing percolation into the intellectual property system is happening in the technology-rich developed nations. This has also led to an inherent conflict of interests as to the ownership, utilization and responsibility for conservation of these resources and traditional knowledge.

The debate about the placement of TK in the current IP scenario is ongoing. TK encompasses a wide range of knowledge of aboriginals and indigenous communities, which may be written or oral, and coded or not coded. There are separate notions of property and authorship in respect of such knowledge. It is mostly governed by local laws of the local village and tribal communities, and not IPR laws. Therefore, in order to fit TK into standard requirements of IP laws, a lot of serious efforts would be required.

Knowledge in respect of the practices of traditional and indigenous people could be relevant as source for innovation; the result of which may be protected as IPR. The assumption that the traditional knowledge of communities is part of the public domain has also led to exploitation of such knowledge without any direct returns to these people. Not only that, because the modern IPR system propagates just one notion of IP, i.e. to exclude all others from the commercial use of right-protected material, this would deny even the original holders of TK to benefit from the results of their own knowledge. Therefore, there have been genuine voices raised against protecting the IPR, which had been based on TK. For example, a patent had been granted in the USA on wound healing properties of turmeric (haldi), and the same had to be revoked by the US Patent Office when written evidence of prior art (TK) was produced on behalf of Government of India. Nevertheless, the problem arises when documentary proof of the TK is hard to trace although there may be plenty of unwritten prior use or even some vernacular publications for such evidence.

TK has a number of different subsets, which are designated by different expressions, for example, indigenous knowledge, folklore, traditional medicinal knowledge, etc.,

1484

1484 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

and these subsets may be relevant for innovations in their respective fields. TK has a body of knowledge, which is built over the generations by certain groups of people living in close contact. It may or may not be documented. Also, TK may include a system of classification, for example, empirical observations about the local weather conditions in relation to agriculture. Further, TK may be fostered under a system of self-management that governs the resource use. These unique features of TK render it perceptible to corresponding innovations.

Contrary to a common perception, traditional knowledge is not necessarily ancient. It may evolve over the time as a process of periodic, even daily, creation resulting from the response of communities and individuals to the challenges faced due to their socio-economic, socio-political and physical environments. In many ways, therefore, traditional knowledge may be actually referred to as the contemporary knowledge for traditional management and use of resources. It is embedded in traditional knowledge systems that each community may have developed and maintained in its local context. However, the commercial and other advantages derived from the application of such traditional management and use give rise to intellectual property questions that could be multiplied by international trade, communications and cultural exchange.

Sui generis protection of traditional knowledge

The issues related to traditional knowledge and folklore are invariably linked to both IPR law and their protection for sustainable use. The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) considers that there is already some overlap between the intellectual property system and more informal means of protection in these areas, which needs to be resolved (http: //www.wipo.int/). This thinking has led to intergovernmental negotiations at the WIPO platform so as to gather and arrange different viewpoints to ultimately reach some agreement on the preservation, management and use of TK as well as benefit sharing from its commercially viable outcomes. Overall, the intergovernmental negotiations at the WIPO aim at the establishment of a global system for the protection of genetic resources, traditional knowledge and folklore, including the local innovations made by the farmers.

Considering that there are difficulties in applying the classical IPR to traditional knowledge, contract agreements appear to be the right approach for addressing the issue. There is a classical example to this effect from Costa Rica. The Instituto National de Biodiversidad of Costa Rica (InBio) has entered into a license contract with the Merck & Company for bioprospecting in a specified forest area on payment ofa license fee and with the understanding that benefit-sharing arrangements (royalty) will be made in case any commercial product/information is raised by the company. Another example of benefit-sharing agreement for the use of TK may be cited from the arrangement made between the Tropical Botanical Garden and Research Institute (TBGRI), Kerala, India and the Kani tribal community of the area. In this agreement, which was highlighted by the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), benefit sharing by the institute with the community from commercial use of a local plant for tonic has been successfully demonstrated. Nevertheless, in order to render such systems more practical and effective, greater transparency will be needed besides effective valuation of the information available to parties to the agreement vis-a-vis their bargaining power and resources.

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 1485

1485

Other suggestions for the protection of traditional knowledge have been to modify the nature of intellectual property rights to accommodate traditional knowledge, to set up institutions that should be responsible for ensuring equitable sharing of benefits, or set up databases of existing traditional knowledge so that this knowledge cannot be appropriated by others.

Public policy and conflicts on IPR

It may be broadly agreed that public policy should have an edge over the application of classical IPR laws in a system wide perspective. Even the TRIPS Agreement recognizes this fact to the extent that there is provision for grant of compulsory licence in public interest, and also that the TRIPS review is open to discussing/negotiating non-IPR issues, like biodiversity and traditional knowledge.

Public policy in the developing and the least developed countries is likely to hold food security, public health and nutrition as the matters of prime importance irrespective of their agreement to provide for IPR laws in conformity with TRIPS. Whereas, in principle, protection of IPR should be available to inventions and ideas concerning the products/processes related to agriculture, the application of the protection regime will be largely governed in individual countries according to their socio-political- economic scenario, which will influence their State policy too.

Another area of public policy concerns the strengthening of institutional capacities of developing countries, which can be achieved by inter alia technology transfer of the IPR protected processes and products. In this context, the developing countries may be encouraged to establish their national IPR system in harmony with the TRIPS Agreement because from such action they may strengthen their capacity to bargain for technology transfer to them by the holders of IPR from the developed world.

IPR and sustainability

The TRIPS Agreement, being part of the WTO system, requires reducing distortions and impediments to international trade by inter alia promoting effective and adequate protection of IPR. However, the WTO members have to also ensure that the measures and procedures to enforce IPR developed/adapted by them do not become barriers to trade.

The Convention on Biological diversity (CBD), on the other hand, primarily aims at sustainability through focused attention on conservation, facilitated access and sustainable use of the earth’s biological diversity. The latter includes the diversity within and among species of organisms and also that of the ecosystems to which they belong. The Convention reaffirmed sovereign rights of countries over their biological wealth as well as the contributions of indigenous communities to knowledge about the use of biodiversity. In order to ascertain sustainable use of the components of biodiversity, and fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the utilization of these resources, CBD has advocated (Article 15) that parties to the Convention should provide for facilitated access to biological resources on prior informed consent and mutually agreed terms. However, there are difficulties in enforcement of various provisions of CBD at the level of countries. A comparison of TRIPS and CBD for salient provisions/issues of concern is made in Table 40.5.

1486

Issue

On bilateral or multilateral basis; However, mechanism not clear

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 1487

1487

Issues and concerns

In the TRIPS Agreement, there is no reference to CBD or the traditional knowledge and, therefore, it may be implied that there is no obligation on the part of WTO members to make any provisions for the protection of genetic resources or traditional knowledge in their IP laws. In fact, the established patent, trademark and copyright regimes may be inimical to the protection of traditional knowledge. Further, CBD requires that any access to and transfer of technology have to be consistent with the adequate and effective protection of IPR. Thus there is no reason to believe that transfer of technology may have to be done on any other terms than those set commercially in the market. Another requirement of CBD that countries should cooperate to ensure that IPR are supportive of and do not run counter to the objectives of the CBD will be subject to international law, which also includes the TRIPS Agreement. Thus it may be important to bring in the TRIPS review specific matters that may harmonize the provisions of both TRIPS and CBD.

Developing countries including India have demanded in the WTO Committee on Trade and Environment in 1996 to take steps for reconciling TRIPS with the objectives/ provisions of CBD. The issue figured in subsequent discussions in the WTO, including at the Doha Development Round. The Doha Declaration required that the review of TRIPS Agreement or that of any other implementation issue should also look at (7) the relationship between TRIPS and CBD, (ii) the protection of traditional knowledge and folklore, and (iii) the other relevant new developments that member governments raise in the review of the TRIPS Agreement. The Declaration at the Doha Ministerial, 2001, further added that the TRIPS review on these topics must take development fully into account, and these areas should be clearly guided by the TRIPS objectives (Article 7) and principles (Article 8).

TRIPS also emphasizes on the prevention of the abuse of IPR by right holders, and their resorting to practices which unreasonably restrain trade or adversely affect the international transfer of technology. Emphasis has been laid on taking all measures only in consistency with the provisions of the Agreement.

The developing countries have been seeking enlargement of the disclosure requirements under Article 29 of TRIPS to include disclosure of source/country of origin of biological material used in the invention, and obtaining prior informed consent from the concerned party before filing the patent applications. India has, nevertheless, expressly provided for this requirement in the domestic laws on patents and protection of plant varieties and farmers’ rights. Disclosure of origin of biological material and traditional knowledge in the application is mandatory and its failure may lead to opposition and revocation of patents/IPR titles. Thus, while Indian IPR laws have been modelled in the best national interests, the country has also to ensure the implementation of salient provisions of both TRIPS and CBD in mutually compatible and reinforcing manners.

IPR and agribusiness

With the implementation of new/revised IPR laws in national jurisdictions, as per the TRIPS Agreement, a sea change is likely to occur in the modalities and sectoral relationships of agribusiness. Reorientation of mindset would become essential. This will also require working in partnership mode with fixed accountability. Accordingly,

1488 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

1488

the system would require more recognition and application of legally enforceable agreements among the partners or the owners and licensees. Public-private relationships will have to improve, even beyond the areas of mutual convenience. For example, public sector institutions are invaluable sources of ex-situ genetic resources and knowledge, and they explore the frontier areas of science using tools of cutting-edge technologies. However, the public sector is considered to be less aware of the requirements and private interests of the contemporary knowledge-based industry. Their R&D efforts, therefore, may have to be complementary rather than exclusive in approach.

Further, a successful commercialization of technology depends on the economic and efficient conversion of the laboratory scale technology to the pilot and commercial scales. The public sector R&D has, therefore, to develop their institutional capacity to transfer their right protected technologies on the terms and conditions that are more familiar to commerce/market. This would require more techno-legal work, such as, Memorandum of Understanding (MoU), Memorandum of Agreement (MoA), Confidentiality Agreement, Assignment Deed, Letter of Agreement (LoA), Material Transfer Agreement (MTA), Benefit Sharing Agreement, etc., besides preparing IPR applications, for example patent documents, and their follow up. Contract research and consultancies for meeting specific objectives and targets will gain increased importance and application.

In terms of private-private partnerships, it may be observed, for example, that small companies may be important to large companies because the former may have their well established albeit small distribution networks in particular remote areas. Further, in changing times, sometimes even the bigger competitors may have to deal with each other in important areas for some common concerns. They may have to share knowledge and materials in that partnership on mutually acceptable terms but, at the same time, protection of undisclosed information in the related field would be their undeclared priority. The developing IP systems are, therefore, have bearing on sectoral relationships among the public and private sectors in all permutations and combinations.

Over the years, increasing commercialization and the inevitable growth of private sector in the field of research and innovation has led to an expanding private domain globally. Keeping aside the desirability factor, there is a need to appreciate that IPRs are a reality at both global and national levels. The way forward is to strengthen the IP protection system, including infrastructure and human resources. At the same time, documentation and codification of existing knowledge is equally important so as to prevent knowledge in the public domain from being exploited. The future course of evolution in agriculture will be essentially guided by nurturing innovations through both IP rights and equitable sharing of benefits. We must understand this as a matter of routine and expand our R&D portfolio to include both components in the national agricultural education and research system.