SOURCE_DOCUMENT: Chapter 27.pdf

27. Post-harvest Technology and Storage

Man’s basic drive is for food to satisfy his hunger. Most of the agricultural produces such as cereals, pulses, fruits and vegetables, milk, eggs, fish and flesh from animals constitute food materials. After production and before consumption all such types of food materials are subjected to several adverse physical and chemical factors as well as microbial and parasitic agents, which may cause their spoilage or lead to diseases when consumed. To prevent these losses—both qualitative and quantitative—and to prepare food for immediate or future use, some processing, preservation and storage practices are required. These practices require a multidimensional perspective, because food security is a physical, environmental, economic and social issue. This multi- disciplinary approach for food security may perhaps be the simplest definition of the post-harvest technology. ’

About 8-10% of foodgrains, 20-40% of horticultural produce and 10—12% of the animal and fisheries production are lost annually in India due to non-availability of appropriate processing and preservation technologies and improper or insufficient facilities for their handling, transportation and storage. The adoption of suitable technologies for processing, preservation and storage of food and other farm products results in conservation, value-addition, income and employment generation for the benefit of both producers and processors. Value-addition has assumed critical importance in the last decade due to the socio-economic and industrial factors. Leaving apart benefits of conservation, processing, preservation and storage of food products, value-addition to the produce is the most appropriate method for making food cultivation more lucrative and also for development of interest of a large section of rural population in agricultural and horticultural activities.

Though the post-harvest technology is probably as old as the agriculture itself, it has assumed greater significance in present-day due to change in human habits, desire of overcoming anti-nutritional factors in some foods and search of new sources of hutritious foods, feed, fibre and fuel. In the present-day context, the post-harvest technology may be defined as a multidisciplinary subject that refers to various treatments and operations carried out on produced or harvested crops, animal and aquatic products for prevention of losses, and preservation and enhancement of quality for consumption and marketing. It relates to all operations such as cleaning and grading (separation), drying or dehydration, storage, extraction, milling, fortification, packaging, transportation and handling carried out on a biomass from stage of harvesting till its consumption. It also includes design, erection and maintenance of structures for storage of all agricultural products at the farm or at the domestic level, at collection centres and at the market places. The science and technology of utilization of co-produces, by-products and residues obtained as the result of processing and value-addition is integral part of the post-harvest technology. Its importance lies in the fact that it has the capability to provide more food, feed and fibres through scientific conservation, elimination of avoidable losses and making more nutritive

POST-HARVEST TECHNOLOGY AND STORAGE

and high-value products from low-grade raw materials. Post-harvest management also enables creation of agro-processing industries at the rural threshold to produce value-added products, assuring greater financial returns and generation of employment opportunities; thus having a greater potential in reviving rural economy. In this reference, the scope of the post-harvest technology has been further broadened in establishing pilot plants, diversification and export, orientation giving due considerations to energy, and household food and nutritional as well as economic security to our population.

Post-harvest losses

Post-harvest losses of the farm produce, especially of fruits, vegetables and other perishables were very high. Based at production level 2007-08, these losses in food commodities were estimated over Rs 1,053,470 million per annum (Table 27.1). The magnitude of post-harvest losses can be better appreciated by the fact that we waste more fruits and vegetables than what the United Kingdom consumes every year.

*On a conservative scale.

Post-harvest operations and value-addition

The post-harvest operations to be performed vary from crop-to-crop due to varied physico-chemical nature of different products. For example, production of rice from paddy, dal (split pulses) and pulse flour (besan) from pulses and extraction of oil from oilseeds involve different sets of unit operations. Thus, post-harvest technological solutions are unique for each crop as well as vary from commodity to commodity, and are location-specific; being different for adoption at the farm level, village level and at organized industrial level.

For food crops, typical unit operations are cleaning, grading, drying, curing, shelling, decortication, parboiling, dehusking, polishing, size reduction, expelling or extraction, mixing, blending, fortification, packaging, quality control, storage, transportation, marketing and byproducts or residues utilization. For fruits and

vegetables, the major unit operations are washing, cleaning, grading, packaging, transportation and storage, besides dehydration, bottling and canning, refrigeration and pickling, followed by by-product or residue utilization. For animal products such as meat, the unit operations are slaughtering, dressing, cutting, packaging, refrigerated storage, cooking or curing, smoking, handling, transportation, marketing, abattoir management and waste management, tanning of skins and hides, collection, processing and utilization of by-products such as homs, hooves, bones and blood. Similarly, various unit operations are associated with processing, preservation and value-addition of milk and milk products, poultry products, fish and other aquatic products, spices and condiments and plantation crops.

Value-addition to food itself can be of various types, viz. isolation of constituents that provide avenues for expanding food uses (e.g. essential oils, oleoresins, vitamins, colour, flavour etc.), processing for transformation into products with precise utilization (expanded rice, semolina, noodles, liquid fruits, baby-food, milk powder), formulation with multiple ingredients to promote health and well-being (fruited cereal flakes, curry powder, ready mixes for traditional foods), improved nutritional quality by enriching with nutrients that are otherwise deficient.

Various avenues available under the post-harvest technology also include food fermentation (idli), fortification (vitamin or lysine-enriched bread) and nutrient supplementation (cereal and pulse based foods), extended availability through drying, canning, storage under conditions that prevent deterioration, fermentation, protective packaging, disinfestation, pickling, minimal processing of fruits and vegetables followed by modified atmosphere storage, juice and other products from seasonal fruits, raising food safety by detoxification (removal of aflatoxin, glucocinolate, haemaglutinin and gossypol from oilseeds), reduction of antinutritional factors (trypsin-inhibitors, tannins, phytase and oxalate from edible plant produce) and regulation of nutrients, preventing deterioration through subfiltration, and use of lactic culture, antioxidants, food-grade antibiotics, bacteriocin, chemical preservatives or salt.

The post-harvest operations also aim to impart convenience (ready-to-eat or ready- to-serve products, instant mixes, ready-to-cook preparations), physical or visual appeal through roasting, frying, toasting, baking, grinding, flaking, use of additives (colours and flavours) and packaging, improvement in hygienic quality for enabling and increasing export potential.

POST-HARVEST TECHNOLOGY

CEREALS

Rice

Rice, the major cereal crop of India, suffers serious losses during and after harvesting activities. Shattering of grains at the time of harvesting up to 46% is quite common. To cope up with the unit operation of cultivation of next crop in intensive farming, the harvested biomass is heaped, resulting in delayed threshing and cleaning, which makes harvested crop vulnerable to birds, rodents and weather hazards, amounting to a loss of 1-3% of yield. Threshing, cleaning, drying, storage and processing operations are also associated with losses, which together amount to about 10%. Out of these losses, at least 60% can be avoided by using simple and

POST-HARVEST TECHNOLOGY AND STORAGE 815

improved post-harvest equipment, viz. cleaners, graders, driers, metal bins and improved milling equipment.

Rice is consumed after cooking in boiling water, as parboiled, parched and puffed rice, or as fermented products like id/i and dosa. It is estimated that about half of the India’s rice-crop is parboiled. Parboiling is a hydro-thermal treatment given to paddy, which changes physical, chemical and organoleptic properties of rice-kernels. The process is particularly good for coarse and medium rice of soft structure, because as such rice suffer excessive breakage when milled raw. Parboiling of paddy has several advantages, viz. dehusking of parboiled rice is easy, grain becomes tougher and hence results in reduced losses during milling, and milled rice has greater resistance to insects and fungus infestation, and the nutritive value of the grain also increases and parboiled rice does not turn into a glutinous mass when cooked.

The milling and polishing of raw rice results in losses of 75% of vitamin B, 56% of riboflavin and 63% of niacin, and parboiling reduces these losses to respectively 58, 35 and 11%. However, the latter has some disadvantages also, viz. the colour changes and sometimes, the unpleasant smell of parboiled rice is not preferred. These changes may be due to the wrong steeping process during parboiling, where fermentive changes take place and results in production of off-flavour and yellowish colour. These effects can be overcome in modern methods of parboiling developed by the Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore; IIT, Kharagpur and Central Rice Research Institute, Cuttack.

Milling of both raw and parboiled rices is essential before its consumption. The process consists of cleaning of paddy-grains (to remove small and large, heavy impurities), dehulling and milling—a process that removes coarse outer layers of grains, viz. bran and germ. Paddy on milling yields approximately 20% husk, 8% bran, 1% polishing and 70% rice. The milled rice consists of unbroken kernels (the head tice) and broken kernels. The latter are then separated based on their size into large fragments (second heads), medium ones (screenings) and smallest ones (brewer’s rice).

rice mills. In modern rice milling, the cleaned paddy-grains are first dehulled in a huller without damage to bran layer and rice kernel, followed by separation of husked rice. The husked rice is then polished to remove germ, pericarp and aleurone layers. Unlicensed local type hullers are very common in India, which give low rice yields (60-65%) and produce poor quality of byproducts in the form of a mixture. The government has been trying to modernize hullers into sheller-type mills to increase yield of rice and to obtain pure byproducts. But eradication of hullers has not been possible till date due to their large number, contribution to rural economy and other socio-economic-political factors. The Indian rice-milling industry is dominated by small-capacity mills of 1-2 tonnes per day. These mills yield poor recovery of quality products; as the result, there is a steady shift from traditional milling in hullers or shellers to modern rice mills for higher recovery and export-oriented milling of 4-8 tonnes per day (tpd) capacity. Hullers, however, continue to be used for custom- milling. There is enough scope for improvement in their milling efficiency for higher recovery, At present, there are 99,700 hullers, 11,000 shellers, 12,000 huller-cum- shellers and 43,000 modern or modernized rice mills in India supported by 2,000 flaking and puffing units.

About 4-5% of total rice produced in India is converted into parched rice or paddy and flaked rice. Parched rice is prepared by roasting rice on sand, heated to a high temperature in an iron or earthen pan. Parboiled rice is normally preferred in making parched rice, which is a crisp product with a grayish to brilliant white colour. For preparation of parched paddy, commonly known as puffed rice, sun-dried paddy is filled in earthen jars and moistened with hot water. After 2-3 minutes the water is decanted and jars are kept in an inverted position for 8-10 hr. Next the paddy is exposed to sun for a short time and then parched on the hot sand to produce a soft product, which is sieved to remove sand and winnowed to separate husk. For preparation of flaked rice, paddy is soaked in water for 2-3 days to soften kernel, followed by boiling in water for a few minutes. Then the water is drained off and the paddy is heated in a shallow earthen vessel or iron-pan till husks break open, after which it is pounded by a wooden pestle. This flattens rice-kernel and removes husk, which is separated by winnowing. Flaked rice is thin and papery, and its vitamin content is equal to that of parboiled rice. It can be stored without deterioration for several months.

The major byproducts of rice-milling industry are husk and bran. Bran is a very good source of edible-grade oil. However, it contains a powerful lipase enzyme, which rapidly reduces oil quality through development of free fatty acids, The rice- bran oil, containing more than 15% free fatty acids, is not economical for processing and refinement. Since adequate facilities for collection and stabilization of rice-bran are commonly not available, very little use of bran is being made to produce edible- grade rice-bran oil. The other byproduct, rice husk is used as fuel and the ash obtained is used for manufacturing ashmoh cement and in transistors and solar cells due to its high silica content. Paddy straw is used in some parts of the country as a cattle-feed, though most of it is burnt in the field itself.

Wheat

Wheat is consumed mostly in the form of flour, obtained by milling of grains, though a very small quantity of it is also used as breakfast food, viz. wheat flakes, puffed wheat and shredded wheat.

Wheat crop suffers severe harvest and post-harvest losses if appropriate technologies are not adopted, particularly during harvesting. It faces serious storage- pest problems with both whole grains and its products like flour, suji (semolina) etc. Storage life of milled wheat product is rather low. On infestation, the control of insects in wheat products is not easy, though fumigants like aluminium phosphide can be used. For this reason wheat, by and large, is sold as grains by farmers. For their domestic consumption, they avail custom-milling services of nearby mill owners, paying 8-10% value of the grains as milling charges, losing about 1% burnt losses and also suffering admixture with other grains.

More than 95% of wheat produced in India is milled in stone-burr grinders (chakkies). The traditional procedure results in 90-95% of extraction in the form of whole meal flour (atta). The product retains almost all nutrients of the grains while eliminating simultaneously indigestible part (cellulose) and phytic acid which binds and carries away minerals. Therefore the Indian style flour is non-technically “whole wheat” but is superior to the usual whole grains flour, obtained by simply grinding wheat to a fine powder.

POST-HARVEST TECHNOLOGY AND STORAGE

In modern milling process, wheat is first subjected to cleaning to remove types of impurities together with damaged, shrivelled and broken kernels, which are collectively known as screenings. Impurities that adhere to grains are removed by washing or by dry scouring; it loosens impurities which are then blown away by air current. Other impurities in the form of particles unattached to the grains are separated by making use of different characteristics of wheat as well as of impurities, viz. size, shape, specific gravity, terminal velocity in air current, magnetic and electro-static properties, colour and surface roughness. The total quantity of screenings removed by using separation technologies generally amounts to 1-1.5% of the grains fed to machine or equipment. Conditioning is the next operation, which improves physical state of the grains for milling. The process involves adjustment of the average moisture content of the wheat to 15-17%, at which state the bran gets toughened and separation of endosperm from the bran becomes easy. Conditioning also improves baking quality of milled flour.

In the next stage, the cleaned and conditioned wheat is subjected to milling to separate endosperm from the bran and germ, and to reduce endosperm to flour fineness to obtain maximum extraction of white flour from wheat. The reduced endosperm is used as flour, whereas the germ, bran and residual endosperm obtained as byproducts are used as animal feed. In milling of wheat in roller mills, the grinding is carried out in 4—5 stages based on the gradual-reduction process. Each grinding stage gives a grind consisting of a mixture of coarse, medium and fine particles including a proportion of flour. The different sized particles thus produced are sorted by sifting and coarse particles are conveyed to a subsequent grinding stage. In each grinding stage, endosperm is separated from the bran coats. The coarse fraction from the last grind can yield no more endosperm and it forms byproduct bran. The percentage of wheat converted into flour from the first grind to the fourth grind is 30, 66, 78 and 8% respectively.

Depending upon the fineness, the wheat flour is separated as afta (whole mill), suji or rava (semolina) and maida (fine flour). Within these broad grades, fine divisions like high and low-gluten atta, low-medium-and high-gluten maida are also obtained, which respectively contain 7, 9, 6, 7, 8 and 10% dry gluten (maximum) and 2.5, 2.5 1.0, 0.7, 0.7 and 1% total ash (maximum), according to BIS specifications. In other countries, these specifications are for particular applications, viz. bread, biscuit and cake.

Protein-displacement milling is also practised, which provides a means of obtaining various fractions from a given wheat markedly different in protein content, suitable for different uses. This process consists of fine grinding of wheat and air classification of flour particles to yield fractions with different protein, contents. It is possible to get from soft wheat a fraction containing 10% protein containing 20% protein. Similarly, a fraction containing 30% protein can also be obtained from hard wheat. Thus by combining various fractions obtained by air separation, it is possible to obtain flours of any desired specifications from one parent flour.

Wheat-milling industry has been operating in both organized as well as unorganized sectors in India. The unorganized sector consists of 390,000 atta chakkies and smaller hammer mills for custom milling with an estimated capacity of about 40 million tonnes per year. The organized sector comprises 830 roller-flour mills with an annual

Processing capacity of about 12 million tonnes wheat. Also there are 54,000 bakery units in the country,

COARSE GRAINS

Maize

Maize is another important cereal-crop in India, which is used for food, feed and for manufacture of starch, sugar (corn sugar), dextrin, syrup, industrial alcohol and alcoholic beverages. Amongst various unit operations involved in processing of maize, milling is the most important. Maize is milled either by a dry or wet process. In both processes, the germ is separated from grains to extract and recover germ oil. The germ oil is a valuable product but, if allowed to remain as a constituent of maize meal, it would lead to rancidity development. After degerming, dry milling employs roller mills and process is somewhat similar to that of wheat-milling. In dry milling of maize, the main objective is to recover maximum amount of grits with minimum amount of flour, having least possible contamination of germ. Accordingly, the grains are cleaned and conditioned by addition of cold or hot water or steam, which results in loosening and toughening of germ and bran. The endosperm is moistened to ideal moisture content such that the yield of grits is maximum. The conditioned grains are passed through a suitable machine to separate bran and germ. The stock after degermination is dried to 15-15.5% moisture content and then sifted to produce large, medium and fine fractions. These fractions are then milled in roller mills. All the finished grits, meal (smaller than grits but coarser than flour) and flour are sifted. The yield of products in dry milling is: grits 40%, coarse meal 20%, fine meal 10%, flour 5% and germ 14%.

Wet milling of maize is done to obtain starch, oil, cattle-feed and products of starch hydrolysis, viz. liquid and solid glucose and syrup. Steeping is the first operation in wet-milling of maize. The cleaned maize is steeped for 48 hr in warm water (50°C), containing some sulphur dioxide, which softens kernels and assists in separation of hull, germ and fibres from one another. The steep water is then drained off and maize is coarsely ground in degerming mills to free germ from grain. Then the ground materials are flowed down in separating troughs, in which hulls and grits settle, while germ overflows. The germ is then separated and dried and oil extracted by hydraulic pressing or by solvent extraction. The degermed material in the separating troughs is finely ground in burr or attrition mills. The hull and fibre, not reduced much in size are also separated from protein and starch by sieving. The suspension of starch and protein from wet screening is adjusted to a specific gravity of 1.04 by dewatering over string filters, and starch is separated from protein by continuous centrifugation. Finally, starch is filtered and dried. The protein in steep water is recovered by vacuum evaporation and dried as gluten feed for animal feeding.

Byproducts of wet-milling of maize have a number of usages. The steep water from wet milling contains free amino acids, proteins, carbohydrates, minerals and growth adjuncts. It is concentrated to about 50% of solids and is used as a nutrient for production of micro-organisms, penicillin and other antibiotics. Maize oil, rich in essential fatty acids, finds use as a salad oil. Its high smoke point makes it suitable for use as a cooking oil. The protein concentrates, maize-bran and oilcakes are used as animal-feeds.

POST-HARVEST TECHNOLOGY AND STORAGE 819

In India, maize is milled for whole meal afta in hand-operated chakkies or power- driven mills. The meal is sifted to remove fibres. In large-scale milling, maida, and suji are produced. Grits are used in the preparation of porridge, to make corn flakes as a brewing adjunct and to manufacture glucose by hydrolysis. Oil is extracted from germ, and bran and germ meal are utilized as animal-feed.

Sorghum

Sorghum constitutes an important food in India after rice and wheat. The whole or broken grains may be cooked like rice or the whole grains may be ground to flour and used to make chapatis. From a blend of wheat and sorghum flours, baked products like muffins, breads and cake can be produced. Sorghum plants are widely used as fodder, either green or as hay and silage. The sugar content of some sorghum stems is high (sweet sorghum) and they are used for making syrup. Sweet-sorghum is also used for making liquid jaggery. Its grains are also used as the source of starch in the fermentation industry for producing industrial alcohol and solvents.

Sorghum grains are processed by dry milling, wet milling and fermentation. The products of milling are chiefly starch and feed products. In India, however, very few processed products of sorghum are produced commercially. Dry milling is used to obtain products low in fibres, feed and ash, whereas wet milling is used for producing starch and its derivatives. The first operation in dry milling of sorghum-grains consists of cleaning of grains, which are then conditioned by water addition to soften endosperm and are milled by conventional roller mills to separate endosperm, germ and bran from one another. The endosperm is recovered in the form of grits with minimum production of flour. Yields of various fractions from dry-milling process are grit 76.7%, bran 1.2%, germ 11% and fibres 10%. Bran and germ are further processed by dry-milling for preparation of oils and feeds, as for maize.

Decortication or pearling, as it is commonly known, is another dry-milling process. In this case, cleaned grains are wetted by spraying water for 2-3 minutes and immediately milled in a pearler or rice huller to remove a major part of the coarse fibres, pigment and phytin with minimum degree of cracking of grains. A maximum of 12% polishing can be carried out. This type of milling can give products rich in protein (up to 27%) and also high in fat and give a high yield of ash but low in fibres. Such products are used in preparation of food products having high protein content.

Wet-milling of sorghum is carried out by method similar to that of wet-milling of maize to produce starch. However, wet-milling of sorghum is more difficult because of small size and spherical shape of its kernels and a dense high-protein peripheral endosperm layer. In wet-milling, some of the pigments of the pericarp and subcoat of the grains leach out and stain starch. Sorghum starch is indistinguishable from corn starch and can be used interchangeably with it in most industrial applications. The residues of wet-milling are used as feed.

Sorghum oil, obtained from germ fraction after refining, is used for salads and cooking. Kernel residues containing bran and gluten are processed as cattle-feed. Sorghum-malt is used in preparation of infant foods and malt extracts are utilized in pharmaceutical industry.

Pearl millet

About 85% of pearl millet production in India is used as food. It constitutes staple

diet of nearly 10% of Indian population. It is consumed after dehusking and cooking in the same way as rice. More commonly it is ground into flour and made into chapattis and thin porridge. The grains are sometimes eaten after parching, yielding a product similar to popcorn. The grains are also suitable for preparation of malt, and an intoxicating drink is obtained from its malted seeds. Pearl millet grains, ground and softened by soaking in water, also find use to a limited extent as animal-feed. The green plants serve as excellent fodder while straw is used as inferior-quality fodder.

The unit operations involved in pearl millet are sun-drying of ears and stalks, threshing of ears, cleaning, winnowing, processing, bagging and storage. However, the processing of pearl millet and other millets for industrial purposes has not been fully developed. Pearling of pearl millet grains to about 8% polish, leaves most of the germs intact and its nutritive value is not seriously affected. Pearling improves appearance of grains, and several traditional dishes are prepared by using flour from pearled grains that have better look and taste. Because of small size of grains, it is more difficult to degerm pearl millet than maize or sorghum, although potential yield of oil from this millet exceeds that from other cereals. Separation of protein from starch is also more difficult in pearl millet.

In general, coarse grains like maize, sorghum, pearl millet, barley, ragi, etc. are mainly processed for flour in unorganized sector in India using burr or hammer-type mills. Problems in pearling of these grains and low shelf-life of these flours have been major areas needing technology intervention. Demand of coarse cereals as industrial raw materials and for feed has also been increasing steadily, thus needing proper research and development efforts towards their diversified application.

PULSES

Pulses constitute a very important food component as the major source of protein (20-40%) in vegetarian diet. Processing pulses is primarily important in improving their nutritive value. Use of whole pulses is not common, instead decuticled split pulses (dal) are used. In pulses, the losses may be up to 15%; based on the crop. Generally losses at threshing yards account up to 6%, and in chickpea (gram), the field-level losses may go up to 12%, mainly due to spilling of grains and pods—a feature particular to the crop. The crop is usually sun-dried in bunches, threshed, cleaned and stored before milling. In India, da/-milling is the next largest food- processing industry after rice-and wheat-flour milling. The average processing capacity of dal mills in India ranges between 10 and 20 tonnes per day.

Milling of pulses involves removal of outer husk, i.e. dehusking, followed by splitting of grains into two equal halves. Dehusking is done to remove hull or husk, which reduces fibres content and improves appearance, texture, cooking quality, palatability and digestibility of pulses. Dehusking of some pulses poses problem and requires some pre-milling treatments, which help in improving dal recovery. The main purpose of pre-treatments is to loosen husk from cotyledons. Alternate wetting and drying method is used for this. However, the adoption of inefficient methods of loosening of husk may result in high milling losses in the form of brokens and powder, giving a yield of only 65-70% split pulses, whereas the potential ranges between 82 and 85%, Pre-treatments also affect germ present between seed-coat and cotyledons. Various methods of pre-treatment are used, which include dry methods, wet methods,

POST-HARVEST TECHNOLOGY AND STORAGE

thermal treatments and chemical treatments. The dry method includes application of oil and water. In this method cleaned and graded grains are subjected to pitting to increase soaking. The pitted grains are mixed thoroughly with 1% oil and spread for sun-drying in a thin layer for 2-3 days. At the end of drying, 2.5% water is sprayed and mixed thoroughly. For tempering, grains are heaped overnight. Then grains are milled in roller machines to give 40-50% dehusked grains. In another method the moisture level of the pulses like pigeonpea is increased and it is left for 24 hr at room temperature, followed by drying up to moisture content of 9% (dry basis). Mustard oil is applied at the rate of 0.6% and the treated grains are left for 24 br before dehulling. About 73.5% hulling efficiency is reported when grains are milled in cylinder-concave mechanism.

Application of red-soil slurry on pulses is named as the wet method, which is popular in South India. The grains are thoroughly mixed with the paste of red soil after soaking in water for 12 hr and heaped for 16 hr. Later the grains are spread in thin layer in drying yards for 2~4 days. When dried, red soil is removed by sieving. Then the grains are milled in power-operated stone or emery-coated vertical chakki. This method results in 95% dehusking and 75% dal yield. The method requires S—7 days to complete processing for a batch of 60—75 q (6-7.5 tonnes). Dal produced by wet-milling method has added advantage of better colour and taste.

Heating of oil-treated pigeonpea grains up to 80°C (air temperature 120°C) in continuous type units with cross-flow hot-air arrangement followed by equilibration for 24 hr result in getting 40-45% and 95% split in the first and second pass respectively. Thermal treatment of pigeonpea grains with heated air (120°C—180°C) in specially designed chambers is found effective measure to loosen husk. This process is popularly known as the CFTRI process. In this process of heating grains attain temperature of 70-90°C, depending upon the variety of grains, and results in dehusking of 95-99% ina single pass when grains are passed through an improved-type dehusking machine.

The common types of equipment used in pulse milling are chakki or disc-sheller, cylinder-concave dehusker, rubber-roller sheller and hullers. Hand-operated chakkies are used for dehusking and splitting of pulses since olden days in domestic and traditional milling. It consists of two cylindrical stones, one stationary and the other rotated by means of a wooden handle. Unhusked or full grains are fed from the centre, and dehusked grains and split dal are obtained at the periphery of the cylinder. Improved power-operated chakkies are of vertical or horizontal types. Emery-coated contact surfaces make traditional chakki more effective. In the cylinder-concave dehusker, a horizontal cylinder rotates within fixed cylindrical surface, known as concave. The grains to be dehusked are subjected to compression and shear within mechanism, causing removal of husk and splitting of cotyledons. The surface of cylinder is coated with abrasive material and curvature of concave is usually kept similar to cylinder. Care should be taken to provide proper clearance between cylinder and concave to avoid crushing of grains. The rubber-roller sheller consists of two rollers rotating in opposite direction with different speeds. When grains pass through rolls, they are subjected to shear and compression, leading to husk removal. As husk is more tightly attached to cotyledons in the pulses, rubber-roller sheller can be used up to a limited extent in pulse-milling industry. But machines cause minimum scouring

Pulse milling in India has been confined to unorganized sector, with an estimated strength of over 12,000 dal mills. Most of these da/ mills have been using milling processes that are weather-dependent and their processing time runs between 7 and10 days. Thus, the losses are very high. The net availability of end-products in the traditional da/ mills has been nearly 65-66% compared with 75-76% in efficient mills, indicating large scope for improvement in the machinery design. The emery- coated roller mills used in India are known as gota machines. About 40-50% pulses are dehusked in a single pass. The dehusked pulses and splits are separated with the help of sieves, and husk is aspirated off. The unhusked and dehusked full grains are again conditioned before milling. It takes 2-3 passes to produce grade-I dal. Polishing is done to dehusk splits by application of a small quantity of oil and water. Rubber- roll shellers or cone-type rice polishers may also be used for this purpose.

Preconditioning of dal with hot air in two passes and pretreatment with sodium bicarbonate solution or enzymes, recommended by CFTRI, Mysore and GBPUAT, Pantnagar are found very effective in dal recovery. The CIAE, Bhopal; I[PR, Kanpur; PKV, Akola; LARI, New Delhi; TNAU, Coimbatore; CFTRI, Mysore and GBPUAT, Pantnagar, have developed mini dal mills.

OILSEEDS

The oil used by man for edible and non-edible purposes is extracted both from animal and vegetable sources. India with a large vegetarian population depends much on the latter. About 95% oil is obtained from eight major oilseed crops, viz. groundnut, rapeseed and mustard, sunflower, safflower, sesame, linseed, castor and soybean. These oilseeds have oil content ranging from 20 to 60%. The present production of major oilseeds in India is 28.83 million tonnes, which is insufficient to meet oil and fat requirement of 18 g/day/head; therefore, the shortfall is being met through imports as and when necessary. About 14 million persons are engaged in production of oilseeds and another | million in their processing. The edible oil industry is one of the most vibrant sectors of the Indian agricultural economy with an annual turnover of Rs 7,000 million.

About 5—15% harvesting losses of oilseeds are reported due to lack of judgment on the part of the farmers regarding right stage of harvesting, delayed harvesting, shortage of labour and inefficient harvesting equipment. In addition, there are 2-5% threshing losses, 2—3% losses of seed in cleaning and 10-15% in storage. It is also estimated that more than 0.5 million tonne oil is lost annually in processing due to lack of appropriate post-harvest technologies and improper storage of oilseeds and their products. The major post-harvest operations of oilseed crops include drying or curing, cleaning and grading, pre-treatments, oil expelling and extraction, refining and vanaspati production, packaging and utilization of byproducts. Extraction or expelling of oil in India is done by using mechanical expellers and chemical (solvent extraction) methods. The mechanical methods include use of ghani (animal or power operated), rotary oil mills, oil expellers and hydraulic presses. About 10% or more of oil goes in the oilcake which is obtained as the byproduct in mechanical expelling. In attempts to enhance oil recovery and reduce residual oil content in oilcakes, various pre-milling treatments are also adopted, which include size reduction, soaking or increasing moisture content, drying or roasting, steaming, flaking, pelletization and

POST-HARVEST TECHNOLOGY AND STORAGE 823

chemical treatment. Although solvent-extraction methods are very efficient and leave only about 1% oil in the cake, they are capital-and volume-intensive and also require very special skills. Recovery of oil from other oilseeds or oil-bearing materials is carried out mainly by two processes: seed crushing and solvent extraction. Solvent extraction is also used for oil recovery from minor oilseeds and rice-bran. Food- grade normal hexane, which is highly volatile and inflammable, is used as the solvent. Oil and protein contents are not affected in the cake obtained from solvent-extraction plant.

Filtration and refining of crude oil obtained from various methods is also a basic unit operation of oil mills. The crude oil contains impurities, both physical and chemical, bad colour and odour have to be removed before use by consumers. The suspended particles and impurities are removed by filtration. The simplest method of separation is sedimentation in gravity tanks. Vacuum or centrifugal filtration equipment are also being used. Refining is done to remove free fatty acids, phosphatides or mucilaginous materials or other impurities present. Alkali refining of oil with caustic-soda removes free fatty acids, phosphatides and related substances. Pigments of cottonseed oil are also removed by alkali refining. Acid refining is used to reduce red and yellow colours of vegetable oils. Furfural is used to remove free’ fatty acids (FFA) from oil. Similarly, steam is also frequently used for this purpose. The oil thus produced must be deodorized to make it food grade.

Oilseed cake is the major byproduct of oilseed-processing industry. The oilseed cake obtained through ghani, expellers and solvent-extraction methods contains oil in decreasing order. Cakes contain high amounts of protein, which can be used to feed people suffering from malnutrition. However, presently most of it is utilized as animal and poultry-feed or is exported as animal-feed. Dehulled oilseed cakes can be utilized in confectionary to make traditional products like halwa, candies and as garnish on bread and rolls.

Groundnut

When groundnut is not properly stored, it gets contaminated with fungus Aspergillus flavus, resulting in the production of a toxic substance, aflatoxin. When moisture content of the groundnut is more than 8%, there is the danger of fungal infection. Consumption of oil from fungus-infected nuts is a health hazard. Hence groundnut should be dried to safe moisture level soon after harvest and stacked where the relative humidity may not exceed 70%. This will help in maintaining moisture content of the dried nuts. The safe moisture content limits for storage of groundnut-kernels and pods are 4-6% and 7-9% respectively.

Groundnut pods are stripped by pulling out pods from plants manually and are traditionally dried in the sun for 4-6 days. Decortication of pods is the next unit operation for removal and separation of kernels. Oil is extracted by using village ghanis, rotary mills, oil expellers etc. Strippers, decorticators and driers are commercially available for various post-harvest operations of groundnut-crop. The cake obtained from groundnut-processing industry is used for preparation of groundnut-flour; one of the most widely used materials to produce protein-enriched foods. In combination with pulses and cereals, a number of high protein supplementary foods have been developed from groundnut-cake. Groundnut proteins have also been

isolated from it. Groundnut has also been used to supplement milk production and protein enriched preparation, viz. multipurpose poustik foods.

Rapeseed and mustard

The spicy background flavour of rapeseed and mustard oil has ever been appreciated. If the crop is harvested at 20% and above moisture level, it needs to be dried. Threshing is done at 12% moisture level, followed by cleaning and grading. The moisture content of 7% is considered safe for storage of seeds for 1 year. Oil is easily extracted using conventional or improved expelling systems. Though the typical pungent flavour is highly appreciated by consumers in oil, it is very much undesirable in protein-concentrate utilization of cake. Efforts are needed for removal of toxic components for better use of this protein-rich meal.

Sunflower

The crushing and extraction of oil from sunflower is easy and quality of its oil for edible purposes is high. After sunflower comes to maturity, it is left in the fields until colour of the back of its head changes from green to yellow and seeds become loose. Either heads are cut before seeds are quite ripe to avoid shattering losses or the whole plant is uprooted and heads are cut off with a sickle, knife or clippers and are exposed face-up between rows to dry. When they are thoroughly dried, the heads are threshed by beating with flails. The heads are often rubbed face downwards over a metal piece fixed in a wooden frame or are gently pressed against revolving cylinders studded with nails. Threshers are also available. Threshed seeds are spread-out in a thin layer on a dry, airy floor and tured over occasionally until they are dried. The seeds are cleaned and dry florets and other light impurities are removed by winnowing. Oil is usually extracted by cold pressing of dehulled seeds. Its refining losses are low. The residual meal or cake left after oil extraction is used as a high-grade protein supplement for livestock, specially dairy cows and poultry.

Safflower

Traditionally safflower plants are pulled from field manually, heaped for a few days to dry, threshed by beating with sticks and cleaned by winnowing. For safe storage, the moisture content of seeds should not exceed 8% (wet basis). Oil quality as well as value of seed-cake is enhanced if oil is expelled after removing white, tough and thorny coat. The hull is partially decorticated using roller-mills, followed by screening and aspiration. The oil is extracted by cold pressing or by hot dry distillation. If whole-seeds are crushed for oil expression, the resultant cake contains large amounts of fibres and is unfit for human or animal consumption. Technology has been developed to produce edible-grade meal, which can be utilized for isolation of proteins.

Soybean

Though soybean is basically a legume crop, it has been utilized more as an oilseed crop. It is processed for its oil, protein and lecithin. The important post-harvest operations of soybean include cleaning, grading, drying, dehulling, blanching (to remove some antinutritional factors), size reduction, flaking and oil extraction through solvent and storage. Whole beans or partially or fully-defatted cake or meal are used

POST-HARVEST TECHNOLOGY AND STORAGE

in making various traditional and non-traditional products like full-fat flour, dairy analogues, snack foods etc. Its fermented products are nutritious and easily digestible.

There are 155 soybean oil-processing units in India with a total installed capacity of 13.5 million tonnes of soybean per annum besides 200 soya food-manufacturing units.

In oilseed-processing sector, there are 200,000 village ghanis 50,000 improved power ghanis, 55,000 mechanical oil expellers, 704 solvent-extraction plants (with 20-500 tonnes/day capacity), 1,006 oil-refineries and 256 vanaspati units. The capacity existing or licensed for processing oilseeds is considerably in excess of the present availability of raw materials. However, the oilseed-processing industry as a whole is considered inefficient with high unit cost of processing and unduly large quantities of oil left in the cake. The industry by and large suffers from technological obsolescence, with a result that virtually in all fields of vegetable-oil processing, there is excessive consumption of steam and power or energy, and oil recoveries are low and quality of product is poor. Even in solvent extraction, the solvent losses are high, and use of hexane limits use of meal for feed-purpose only. Similarly, other byproducts or residues are not properly utilized, affecting overall economy of oilseeds. Modernization of vegetable oil-processing industry is required for total utilization of various oilseeds and other oil-bearing materials in an integrated manner so that all constituents such as oil, protein, starch and others could be exploited for food, feed and fuel purposes.

FRUITS, VEGETABLES AND PLANTATION CROPS

Fruits and vegetables are an important supplement to the human diet, as they provide essential minerals, vitamins and fibres (roughage) required for maintaining health. Fortunately, India ranks second in production of fruits and vegetables. However, for various reasons this abundance of production is not fully utilized and about 20-40% of it is wasted due to spoilage (Table 27.2).

*Based on 63 million tonnes of fruits and 122 million tonnes of vegetables during 2007-08 and projected population of 1,147 million in 2008-09. **Recommended at 120 g of fruits and 300 g of vegetables per caput per day.

There are two post-harvest approaches to solve the above problem. One is the creation of cold storage or cool-chain facilities for fruits and vegetables-producing regions and in major urban consumption centres to ensure supply of fresh fruits and vegetables throughout the year. In another approach, the fruits and vegetables can be processed and preserved for a long time with benefit of value-addition. The country

has very limited cold-storage facilities (for storage of approximately 23.3 million tonnes food products) whereas the fruit and vegetable (excluding potato)-processing industry uses only 2.0% of the total production, though the installed capacity for processing has grown steadily from 0.27 million tonnes in 1980 to over 3.0 million tonnes in 2006.

The estimated production of processed fruits and vegetables in India is: fruit juices and pulp, 25%; jams and jellies, 10%; pickles, 33%; ready-to-serve beverages, 13%; synthetic syrups, 8%; squashes, 8%; tomato products, 11%; canned vegetables, 4% and others, 18%. There are about 6,736 licensed fruits and vegetables processing industries in India. Besides, a very large number of small and cottage industries and housewives/women entrepreneurs are engaged in such activities.

Though there is a considerable scope for expansion of fruit and vegetable- processing industry, the major constraints in development of their processing sector in India are high cost and variation in the quality of raw materials, and inadequate and expensive cold-storage facilities for storage and transport and distribution of Taw as well as processed products.

Preservation of fruits and vegetables by drying is one of the oldest methods of processing. Drying or dehydration extends keeping qualities of fruits and vegetables beyond their normal storage life, saves storage space and makes transportation convenient and easy. The process of drying or dehydration, apart from removing water, destroys some ascorbic acid and leads to loss of volatile substances responsible for flavour of fruits. However, dried or dehydrated fruits are valued for sweet flavour, and dry fruits such as figs, resins, dates, prunes, apricots, banana and apple are important articles of agri-business. For drying operation, sun-drying is practised in tropical and subtropical regions, involving other operations like washing, peeling and placing prepared products on the flat-bottomed trays. Fruits like thick-skinned grapes and peaches are dipped in a hot-alkaline solution for a short time to crack or check skin or to remove peel to facilitate drying.

For mechanical dehydration, various types of equipment with provision of controlling temperature, humidity and rate of airflow are used. Tunnelled dehydrators are very common. Temperature and humidity used for mechanical drying depend on the kind of fruit being dried. Vacuum dehydration is also used, which can bring down moisture content of fruits to 1-3%. In this method, there is no damage to the structure of the fruits, and its shelf-life is quite high. Fruits dehydrated in this way must be stored in vacuum or with nitrogen-gas. Puff drying is another method used in drying of fruits like apple and blue-berries. In this method, the fruits are heated under pressure and suddenly pressure is released. The water leaves fruits leaving puff-dried fruits, which are then dried further.

The other methods used for the preservation of fruits and vegetables include aseptic processing, preservation by high temperature (using pasteurization at temperatures below 100°C or sterilization at temperatures of 100°C or above), preservation by low temperature (using refrigeration or chilling temperatures, freezing), cellular- storage techniques or using preservatives like chemicals such as sulphur-dioxide or benzoic acid, preservation by carbonation, filtration, fermentation and irradiation. There are some other traditional methods of fruits and vegetables preservation used in India, which include preservation by oils and spices, acids, salts, sugars, antibiotics

POST-HARVEST TECHNOLOGY AND STORAGE

etc. Some of the major byproducts and wastes of fruit and vegetable-processing industry are also utilized.

Keeping in view the vast scope of expansion of fruits and vegetables processing industry in India, there is an urgent need of developing packing stations with facilities for sorting, grading, and processing. There is also a need to introduce palletization in trading of fruits and vegetables, and mechanical loading or unloading. For export, world-class cool-chain, pre-cooling units, grading and packaging units, cold storage in production and exit points and refrigerated transport are essential to compete in exports with the rest of the world.

Mango

The total post-harvest losses (harvesting to marketing) in mango are estimated in the range of 20-30% To improve marketability, fruits are harvested with pedicel to avoid injury. Simple and efficient harvesters developed by the I[HR, Bangalore; CISH, Lucknow; IARI, New Delhi and KVK, Dapoli, are also available. Minimization of post-harvest losses is the main challenge. Some of the methods used for extending shelf-life of mango are low temperature storage, controlled atmosphere storage, sub- atmosphere pressure storage, use of chemical treatments for delaying ripening, irradiation, heat treatment, packaging, shrink wrapping etc. Combination of waxing (3%) along with heat treatment result in good quality fruits for extended storage life. Individual wrapping of fruit imparts certain surface colour, reduced spread of pathogens and shrinking. Hydro cooling at 12—-15°C and holding for 2 weeks at 15°C, followed by storage for 1 week at ambient temperature results in good quality fruits. A number of processed products like jam, juice, squash, nectar, pulp or puree, mango powder and pickles are also prepared from mango. Mango processing factories produce 40-60% of the total fruit intake as waste constituting 12-15% peel, 5—10% pulper waste and 15—20% stone.

About 25-30% of the fruit is wasted during canning. The peel is a good source of some nutrients such as sugars, pectin, protein and fibres. The peel and pulp can be utilized to manufacture juice and nectar by pectin-enzyme treatment. Good quality wine and vinegar could also be prepared from the juice extract of fresh waste and syrup from dried waste after partial precipitation of tannins to reduce astringency. Kernels from the stones can be dried, processed and utilized for edible purposes. Mango-stone oil is used for edible purposes.

Citrus

Mandarin orange, kinnow, sweet orange, lime and lemon are the important citrus crops produced in India. The bright colour, pleasing flavour and sweetness make them favorite fruits. They are served as slices or juices.

The richness of vitamin C in all citrus fruits makes them valuable from nutritional point of view. Citrus fruits have a higher pectin content. Maturity of these fruits is shortest in acid-lime (5-6 months) and longest in mandarin and sweet oranges (9-10 months). Total soluble solids (TSS), acid ratio and external colour of fruit are considered indices for determining harvesting stage. For mosambi, blood red valencia and sweet oranges grown at Abohar, Punjab, the TSS: acidity ratio of 30:1, 14:1 and 10: 1, respectively have been considered as optimum maturity index. Pre-harvest

spray of chemicals and growth-regulators increase shelf-life of fruits. Post-harvest diseases are one of the major causes for deterioration of fruits during post-harvest handling and storage. Treatment of fruits with 1,000 ppm Bavistin can reduce post- harvest losses appreciably and extend shelf-life to 25-26 days even at ambient temperature. Waxing with Benomy] or other growth-regulators has also been found beneficial in extending shelf-life of kinnows. Wrapping of fruits with grease-proof paper or perforated polyethylene bags, packing in wooden crates and storage at 0- 3°C temperature and 86-90% relative humidity are found optimum. Best storage temperature for Darjeeling mandarin is 1.5-3°C. Degreening at 26—28°C and 90— 95% relative humidity with 500 ppm ethylene could be achieved in Nagpur oranges without affecting internal quality. The shelf-life of such fruits could also be extended by 3 weeks on wrapping fruits with heat-shrinkable polyethylene film and cryovate film.

Peels are the most important waste products; others being rags, seeds and sludge. Peels can be used for making candy and extraction of essential oils used in confectionery. Pectin can be prepared from rags of ga/gal and orange. Rags can also be used in preparation of marmalade, orange toffee and as cattle-feed after drying. Orange and lime seeds can be used for extraction of seed oil used in several industries. Lime-sludge is used for distillation of lime oil. Citric acid can also be prepared from sludge. Orange residues can be fermented into fruit-vinegar.

Banana

Angularity of the banana fruit is indicative of harvesting maturity. The fruit is harvested when the ridges on the surface of the skin change from angular to round after attainment of 3/4th full stage. Pulp : peel ratio on weight basis at the time of harvest also gives a fairly accurate maturity index. Dwarf cavendish cultivar at 3/4th full maturity gives pulp : peel ratio of 1.35 to 1.40 under normal conditions of cultivation. Harvesting methods vary depending on the region. However, harvesting bunch after cutting three-fourths pseudostem is recommended for better recycling of nutrients. Dehanding and hand-packing methods are standardized for a few cultivars, but bunch packing continues to be the common practice. Hydrocooling, use of ethylene absorbent and packing with polyethylene wrapping increases green shelf-life. Storage and transport at 12-14°C improves shelf-life.

Bananas can be processed in different forms. Aseptically packed pulp has high demand for export. Plantain is processed as chips. Banana puree is used in dairy products, bakery, beverages and baby foods. Banana flour and banana beverages are also becoming popular. Pulpy portion of banana-peel and pseudostem can be used for making banana cheese and paper pulp.

Papaya

Papaya is used mainly for table purpose. Being a highly perishable and soft fruit when ripe, it needs careful post-harvest handling. Fruits harvested at colour-break stage can be ripened at 12-13°C and stored at 7°C. Temperature between 13 and 16°C has been found adequate for storing papaya. Chilling injury is often noticed on papaya during prolonged storage below 12°C. Post-harvest treatment of fruits with controlled atmosphere, waxing of fruits and storage under low pressure help in

POST-HARVEST TECHNOLOGY AND STORAGE

extending shelf-life of papaya-fruits. A ready-to-serve papaya-juice drink, cereal- and pulse-based papaya powder, papaya-candy or tutti-fruitti are produced, which have a great potential in bakery and confectionery industries. Papain and pectin production and extraction processes are standardized. About 500 kg of pectin is obtained from a hectare of papaya.

Grape

A major portion of grapes produced in India is used for table purpose and only 10% is used for resins, juice and wine-making. Grapes spoil more quickly than other fruits during handling, transport and storage. Their best storage conditions are—1°C to 0°C and 85-90% relative humidity. The extent of post-harvest losses depends on the type of containers used for packaging. Losses in grapes packed in wooden crates and bamboo-baskets are greater than corrugated fibre board (CFB) cartons. The percentage produce packed in wooden boxes, corrugated cartons and bamboo-baskets in India is estimated at 45, 35 and 20%. Prompt pre-cooling checks stem desiccation, browning and berry-shattering. Wrapping of fruits in one-third sheet of grape-guard (a dual release sulphur-coated paper) packed in polyethylene bags and corrugated fibre board cartons and stored at 1-3°C gives a shelf-life of 8-12 weeks in comparison to normal shelf-life of 3-4 days. Pre-harvesting application of fungicides or growth regulators has been found to increase shelf-life of fruits. The grading of grapes is done according to size, sugar content and appearance. The culled produce is used for wine-making, feed for cattle or for making any other by-products. Size grades are used in India. Grapes are processed for non-alcoholic grape juice. Juice is extracted from crushed grapes by means of a basket press. The bottled juice is preserved by pasteurization or by addition of sodium benzoate. Preparation of fruit-juice concentrate is done by evaporation process. Techniques have also been standardized for producing superior-quality golden-bleached resins by lye-dipping, fumigating with sulphur-dioxide and shade-drying. Natural resins of very good quality are produced in Maharashtra by following ethylolerate cold-dipping and shade-drying. Grapes-jelly is also possible to be produced.

Stems and pomace are the main waste products. The skin is used for preparing cream of tartar. Oil can be extracted from seeds and cake may be used as cattle-feed. Pomace can also be used for making jelly and chutney.

Guava

Post-harvest losses in guava orchards are up to 10-15%, mostly caused by birds, squirrels, insect-pests, mechanical damage and other physiological factors. More losses are observed in monsoon-crop than in winter crops. The estimated post-harvest losses due to different fruit-rots range from 40 to 60%, depending on the type of rot. The fruit turns greenish yellow with the advancement of maturity. The fruit should be harvested immediately when mature, because it cannot be retained on the tree in the ripe stage, and is liable to be damaged by birds. Most cultivars except Allahabadi Safeda could be stored for two days at an ambient temperature. Safeda can be stored for 4 weeks in cold storage at 8.5 to 14°C. Only a small quantity of the production is utilized for processing in the form of jelly, canned products, juice and nectar, cheese, toffee, bar and powder. Flakes and strained baby foods have also

830 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

been prepared. Guava cheese is the most important product prepared from guava wastes like cores, seeds and peels left after extracting juice which is quite similar to halwa.

artificially for use. A dull orange or potato colour of fruit surface is indicative of maturity of sapota. A mature fruit when scratched lightly shows a yellow streak instead of a green streak, which is a sign of immaturity. The dried spine like stigma at the tip of the fruit falls or drops off easily when touched. Also the milky latex content is reduced when the fruit matures. The fully mature fruits are harvested with stalk intact, individually by giving a twist and collecting without bruising. Fruits are highly perishable and they undergo rapid ripening within 5—7 days, during which fruits become soft, sweet and develop excellent aroma with decline in tannins, latex, sapotin, aldehydes and acidity. These changes are associated with increase in production of ethylene, rate of respiration, and catalase and peroxidase. These changes can be regulated through chemicals, temperature and storage gas composition. Some handling standards have been worked out. The harvested fruits are cleaned of latex and scurf by washing in clean-water to make them look attractive. Such fruits should be graded into big, medium and small size at farmer’s level to fetch better price. Fmuits are tightly packed in cardboard boxes of 10-kg capacity with rice-straw as padding material, that is ethylene absorbent, and transported quickly to wholesale markets. For extending shelf-life and to avoid storage-rots, fruits are dipped in gibberellic acid (GA) 300 ppm + Bavistin 1,000 solution at pre-packing stage. Low temperature extends shelf-life by reducing oxidative metabolism and release of ethylene. Short-term (less than 10 hr) holding of fruit at 40°C before storage at 20°C extends shelf-life up to 24 days with satisfactory quality. Modified storage with 5— 10% (v/v) CO, can be used for long storage (21-25 days). Refrigerated-vans (12— 13°C) should be utilized for long distance and export market. Sapota could be processed to produce sapota slices, powder, jam, jelly, glucose and pectin. However, this fruit has not been rated fit for use in processing due to heat-labile nature of its delicate flavour, unagreeable pulp colour, presence of gummy material and development of acrid taste and loss of flavour in the processed products. The fruits could be utilized for preparation of fermented products like fruit-wine. New market avenues using fruits in processing in combination with other materials need to be

Apple

Apple is a commercial crop produced in hilly areas of Kashmir, Kullu and Kumaon. India is estimated to produce 1.6 million tonnes of apples annually. The fruit is receiving greater attention of growers because of its high commercial value and better shelf-life. Apples are used extensively as a dessert and cooking fruit. Sliced apple are canned, dehydrated or frozen. They are also used in the preparation of jams, jellies, murabba, apple-butter and apple-sauce. Murabba is prepared from peeled, whole and cut sections of the fruits. The pieces are bleached in hot water containing sodium bisulphite and then lime-water or alum is added as a warming

POST-HARVEST TECHNOLOGY AND STORAGE 831

agent. The pieces are pickled all-over and cooked in sugar syrup, to which a small quantity of citric acid is added. Apple-butter is made by cooking fruits with water, followed by screening. The pulp is mixed with sugar or apple juice, and mixture is concentrated until desired consistency is attained. Spices or other flavoury materials may be added before completion of cooking. Apples are also used for making juice and concentrate. The juice obtained from fruits is strained, pasteurized and bottled. The concentrate is reprocessed into a single strength juice by dilution. By inoculating apple-juice with wine, yeast alcoholic fermentation takes place giving cider, which contains alcohol up to 8%. Apple-wines are made by fermenting a mixture of apple- Juice and sugar so that product does not contain more than 14% alcohol. Apple brandy is obtained by distilling clarified cider in pot-stills.

Apple grown in upper belts of Jammu and Kashmir can be stored for 90 days under ambient conditions, whereas apples grown in lower belts can be stored only up to 60 days. Polyethylene wrapping of fruits significantly improves storage capacity of fast-deteriorating Red Delicious apples. The influence of post-harvest infiltration of calcium chloride on the keeping quality of Red Delicious apples has been investigated under various storage conditions. The fruits treated with 1% calcium chloride for 5 min. registered less pathological and physiological spoilage compared with untreated fruits. In Himachal Pradesh also, pre-harvest spray of 0.5% calcium chloride and post-harvest dipping (4%) have been recommended for improving shelf- life of apples. The shelf-life of tray-packed apple-fruits in corrugated film-board cartons extends up to 240 days in cold storage at 0 + 1°C when packed with a sachet of Purafill or potassium permanganate crystals (5 g/kg fruit) or with small brick pieces impregnated with 2% potassium permanganate solution. The pomace remaining after extraction of juice and removal of cores can be used for preparation of pectin, cider, vinegar and chutney.

Pineapple

The popularity of the pineapple as a dessert fruit is mainly due to its sugar content and flavour, though it has also vitamins A and C. Large quantities of fruits are canned as chunks or slices. Pineapple juice is a popular beverage. Fresh juice contains proteolytic enzyme bromelain, which aids digestion, but it is destroyed during canning. Steps are needed to improve performance of Indian pineapple industry for evolving an efficient distribution network within and outside the country. This calls for an integrated approach towards development of infrastructural facilities like transport, improvement in packaging, storage and handling facilities.

About 40-50% of fruit is wasted during canning. Juice extracted from trimmings and other wastes can be refined and used for canning pineapples as canned or bottle juice. Citric acid can be prepared from this juice and also alcohol and vinegar by fermenting it. The core can be used for preparing or extracting juice and cake is used as cattle-feed. Pineapple tops and leaves mixed with molasses (1%) and urea (0.2%) can be used as cattle-feed.

Cashewnut

It is one of the important export-earning crops. The nuts are roasted before they are shelled. Roasting adds to flavour and taste of kernel. Over-roasting or under-

roasting adversely affects both quality and recovery of kernels. Various methods roasting are used to recover maximum amount of shell oil. After roasting, nuts are broken, avoiding breakage of the kernels as far as possible. The thin reddish-brown skin of the kernels is easily removed by hands after kernels have been placed for a few hours in drying chambers. The kernels are then graded based on the size and are packed. The kernels possess pleasant taste and flavour and are eaten raw, fried and sometimes salted or sugared. They are an esteemed dessert and are used as a substitute for almonds, with which they compare very favourably. Large quantities of cashewnuts in India are used in sweetmeat and confectionery preparations. Cashew-shell oil is used for water-proofing and preservation purposes in paints and lacquers. The oil polymerizes and finds uses in various industrial manufacturings. Raw fruit juice, being rich in sugar (11.5%), can also be utilized for production of alcohol. A fermented liquor, kaju is made from cashew apples, and distilled kaju is popularly known as feni. It is possible to prepare jam, jelly and candy from cashewnut. The Kerala Agricultural University has developed both alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages with cashew apples. Unfortunately these products have received very little commercial acceptability. The cashewnuts can be stored both at ambient and low temperatures up to 12 months without much deterioration.

Coconut

Coconut fruits are ovoid, three-angled, long containing a single seed. The exocarp (outer husk) is thick and fibrous, enclosing a hard and bony endocarp shell. Inside shell is a thick and white fleshy layer of kernel, commonly known as coconut-meat. The cavity of the endosperm is large, and in the unriped or tendor coconut a watery fluid known as coconut water is found. As the fruit ripens, the liquid gradually gets absorbed and thickness of the kernel increases.

Coconuts are used for a number of purposes. The fresh kernel may be eaten directly as a fruit, but more often it is grated and is used in the preparation of many foods such as puddings, sweets, curries and chutneys. The principal use of coconut is in the manufacture of copra, from which coconut-oil and coconut-cake are obtained. The extraction of oil from copra is done by using traditional milling, dry milling and improved wet-milling methods. Shredded coconut kernel is dried to obtain desiccated coconut, which is used in the manufacture of cakes, pastries and chocolates. The water of the unripe coconut is a refreshing drink and has the advantage of being sterilize. The coconut sap or juice, obtained by tapping or cutting stalk of the young flower-bunches of coconut, is rich in sucrose and ascorbic acid. In fresh state, it is a sweet foddy or neera and used as the beverage. Sweet foddy, if carefully collected in sterile vessels remains unfermented for a considerable time. The fermented product, toddy, is used as a beverage and contains about 4% alcohol. Arack is the product obtained by distillation of fermented toddy and contains 35% alcohol. Coconut-sap when strained and evaporated gives jaggery. Copra press-cake and meal are utilized as animal-feed. The production of coconut-flour, a food-grade product from coconut endosperm, is viewed as an alternative to copra manufacture. Coconut-husk is a useful fuel and its ash is a valuable fertilizer. The husk removed from unsplit coconut for the manufacture of coir-fibre.

Coconuts are stored mostly as dried copra. The traditional drying practice usually

POST-HARVEST TECHNOLOGY AND STORAGE

involves sun-drying and combination of sun-drying with mechanical drying. A variety of pre- and post-harvest devices have been developed, which include multipurpose driers of various capacities using farm-wastes as fuel, electronic copra motsture- meter and tree-climbing devices for harvesting of coconuts. Development of commercially feasible and economically viable wet-milling process for coconut and development of new food items based on coconut-milk, cream and flour, protein products and desiccated coconut are areas of current interest in coconut-processing industries.

Pomegranate

Pomegranate is also a non-climacteric fruit, and therefore needs to be picked only when fully ripe. The fruit attains best quality after 135-150 days of anthesis. The fruit maturity is indicated by rind colour to a great extent. The ripe fruits get suppressed on the sides and when pressed from outside give a distinct sound of grain-cracking. Cracking of fruits is one of the serious problems in pomegranate which reduces market value of fruits considerably. The fruits after harvesting are graded according to their size, weight and colour, and are packed in bamboo or wooden-boxes or paper-cartons, using cushioning material. The pomegranate fruits have better keeping quality than other tropical fruits such as mango, grape and banana. The fruits can be stored for more than 2 months at 4-5°C, if treated with fungicide. It may be possible to store fruits even for longer periods. Pre-harvest sprays of Ethephon delays ripening of fruits and could be used to prolong their storage life. Storage at freezing temperature has been found to cause chilling injury. Fungal spoilage sometimes occurs during storage. Use of preservation chemicals having fungitoxic value, e.g. 3% potassium metabisulphite, borax or sodium bisulphite, gives satisfactory control against soft- rot. Spraying packing straw with 5% solution of sulphur compounds also gives good protection.

The fruit is normally eaten raw, and seeds along with fleshy portion are dried and commercially marketed as anardana, which is widely used as a condiment. A delicious juice is also prepared from fruits and is largely used as a cool-drink. Wines and rind powder are also prepared. Since fruit contains large quantity of tannin, juice-extraction technique has been standardized to reduce its content. The excess tannin in juice can be precipitated by gelatin and juice can be clarified by pectinase enzyme or heating in a flash pasteurizer at 79-82°C for 30 min., cooling, settling for 24 hr, racking up and filtering. The clear juice can be preserved by heat treatment or by adding 600- ppm sodium benzoate. The loss of anthocyanin pigment in storage is greatly reduced at 5°C. Fruit juice concentrates, singly or in blended form, are products with great potential on account of their wide applicability in fruit-based beverages. Wine, jelly and syrup are prepared from this fruit. A dry powder prepared from rind can be used as a tooth powder or for medicinal and cosmetic purposes and in leather and drying industries.

Ber

All fruits on the ber tree do not ripen at one time. Therefore, 4-S pickings have to be done during the season. The best index for correct picking stage is the characteristic maturity colour and softness of a particular cultivar after fruit attains full size. Sorting

of damaged, spoiled, mis-shaped and diseased fruits must be done before packing. Grading should be done based on the size and maturity. Ripe fruits are stored for about a week at room temperature and for about 3 weeks in a refrigerator. Storage life could be prolonged by packing in polyethylene bags. The fruits are generally packed in gunny bags or white cloth sheets. Perforated cartons with cushioning materials are also used for long-distance transport. Several products can be prepared from ber fruits, which includes candy, murabba, dehydrated ber, ber pulp, jelly and ready-to-serve beverages.

Stone fruits and nuts

These fruits include apricot, sweet and sour cherry, peach and nectarine, plum, almond, chestnut, pecan and walnut. Stone fruits are available when there is scarcity of other fresh fruits in the market, which makes their cultivation more profitable and lucrative for growers. Apart from fresh fruits, they provide excellent material for canning and fruit-processing industries. The advancements in technology of dehydration have opened up new vistas. The nuts offer very good scope for hilly and remote areas for their cultivation, as almost all of them except chestnut do not pose much problems in transportation and storage. These fruits also provide excellent opportunities for diversification of market.

The peach waste (kernels) can be used for extraction of oil, and the kernels of white apricot are sweet and can be added to jam after removing seed-coat to improve colour and appearance. Oil can also be extracted from kernels, and after refining, it appears similar to almond oil, and can be used in pharmaceutical and cosmetics preparations. The oil-cake is rich in protein and can be used as cattle-feed.

Tomato

The high vitamin content and multiple uses in culinary preparations have made tomato an important vegetable, outranking all other vegetables except potato in popularity and value. The tomato is available throughout the year and its fruits are juicy and highly perishable, which cannot be stored at low temperature and require special care in handling, transportation and marketing. Tomatoes are eaten as green vegetables, salads, fried, baked or stuffed food products besides as soups, sauces or ketchups. Large quantities of tomato are canned, either whole or as tomato juice or puree. The seeds can be used for extracting an edible oil and trimmings for preparing juice, sauce or puree.

Potato

Potato plant is a perennial herb and its fibrous roots and rhizomes become swollen at the tip to form edible tuber, known as potato. Potatoes are a valuable article of diet, which under suitable conditions yield a higher food value per hectare than any cereal. As cooked vegetable, they are served in large varieties of ways: boiled, steamed, fried, baked, roasted or as ingredient of soups, stews and fries. They are processed into products such as potato chips, dehydrated mashed potatoes, frozen potato products, French fries and potato flour. Potatoes are also used for production of potato starch and dextrose. Industrial alcohol is produced by fermentation of cooked potatoes. Considerable quantities of potatoes are also used for feeding livestock.

POST-HARVEST TECHNOLOGY AND STORAGE

However, potatoes are highly perishable and need careful handling and storage. Its waste can be used for making cattle-feed.

Onion

Onions are extensively cultivated in India as a valuable vegetable, which is used either as a salad or for cooking with other vegetables. Its characteristic pungency present due to volatile sulphur compounds is very much liked by many people. Onion is dehydrated as flakes and made into powder and exported.

Tuber crops

Tropical tuber crops such a cassava (tapioca), sweet potato and yams are major source of carbohydrates. By and large they are used for table purpose and consumed as fresh food after boiling, baking, steaming, roasting or frying. Only a small fraction is used for animal-feed, processed for food or manufactured into industrial products. However, these crops have potential usage, viz. as high-energy food, animal feed- mix and as an industrial raw material for ethanol, glucose, fructose, itaconic acid and sorvitol. Because of homestead cultivation, longer duration to mature, inconsistent supply of marketed surplus, irregular shape and bulky size, proper attention has not been paid to development of post-harvest technology of such crops in India or elsewhere.

The post-harvest operations in tuber crops include peeling (for removal of corky skin or fibrous rind), chipping (slicing), drying of chips/slices, its grinding (for flour), extrusion and starch extraction. Peeling machines have been developed for cassava- tubers by the TNAU, Coimbatore; and CTCRI, Thiruvananthapuram. The TNAU machine has a capacity of 90 kg tubers/hr and is powered by a 1-hp electric-motor, with a peeling efficiency of 85%. The CTCRI machine, on the contrary has 34 kg/hr output, 91% peeling efficiency and 1.6% flesh loss. In large-scale modern cassava-starch industry, a peeling machine with 76.0% peeling efficiency is used. This machine consists of a U-shaped trough and a central rotating shaft with paddle arms.

Chips and crispies are conventionally produced from cassava, dioscorea, amorphophallus, colocasia and xanthosoma by slicing tubers with hand-knives. Cassava-chips are produced in various forms, sizes and shapes. Edible cassava-chips in India are generally of two major types: white and parboiled. White chips are obtained by peeling, slicing and drying. To make parboiled chips, slices are boiled in water for about 10 min. before drying. Parboiled chips are less susceptible to insect infestation. A hand-operated cassava chipping machine has been developed and technology has been transferred to entrepreneurs through the NRDC of India. Paddle-operated and power-operated cassava-chipping machines have also been developed. Conventionally sliced tubers of cassava are dried in open-air under sunlight by spreading in a single layer on the cemented floor, bamboo-mat, rock surface or sometimes even on earth. Depending on the weather, it takes 2-5 days to dry chips. Dried slices of cassava and sweet-potato are ground to flour, using mostly attrition mills. Like other root-starches and unlike cereal starches, cassava starch tends to cook to a translucent, although sticky mass. Technologies have been developed for preparation of macroni, vermicelli and spaghetti. Tuber crops are richest source of starch. The process of starch extraction

consists of peeling, rasping, screening, settling and drying. Sagu is manufactured from partially dehydrated (35-40% moisture content) starch-cake. The lumps are broken in a spike mill and then globulated on a gyratory shaker. The globules are graded according to size and then graded globules are partially gelatinized by roasting on shallow metal-pans. Finally sagu pearls are dried in sun on cement flour for 6-8 days. The agglomerates are separated by means of a spike-beater and polished before bagging. Sagu roaster has been developed for this purpose.

Processed products from tuber crops like chips, flour or starch are prone to absorb moisture at a very fast rate. Polyethylene-lined jute-bags are found effective for storage of cassava-chips and flour up to 90 days and starch up to 180 days. Drying starch, flour or chips to a low moisture content at the production level itself is an essential factor in minimizing microbial growth and insect infestation on them.

Yams also form a cheap source of carbohydrate food and are extensively used by hill tribes. The cultivated types of yams are comparable to potato in taste and quality. The tubers of some species are utilized for extraction of starch on a commercial scale, and some are used for alcohol production. Colocasia (arvi) is a perennial tuber plant, which yields tubers rich in starch. The tubers are used in the same manner as potato and are somewhat sweeter. They are more easily cooked than potatoes. Its flesh possesses a delicate nutty flavour when cooked. Young leaves and stalks are also edible and can be cooked and used like spinach.

Spices and condiments

The annual production of spices and condiments in India is about 3 million tonnes. They are used as flavouring agents in a number of foodstuffs such as curries, bakery products, pickles, processed meats, beverages and liquors. They enhance or modify flavours of foods. Spices are also flavour disguisers: they help mask off-flavour of foods which if unspiced may not be relished. Some spices possess antioxidant properties, and others are used as preservatives in some foods like pickles and chutneys. Others like cloves and mustard possess strong anti-microbial properties and hence, prevent food spoilage. Many spices also possess important physiological and medicinal properties. However, they are prone to spoilage due to insect or microbial attack. Hence the spice oils or oleoresins, which contain all the active principles of spices, are extracted and marketed. Spice oils are obtained by steam distillation of ground spices, and oleoresins are obtained by solvent extraction of ground spices or more advantageously of steam-distilled spices. The spice oils contain only aromatic principal, and oleoresins contain both aromatic and pungent principals. Various solvents like acetone, isopropanol, methanol and hexane are used as solvents. Black pepper, cardamom, clove, nutmeg and mace, coriander, ginger, turmeric, cinnamon, fenugreek and garlic constitute major spices. Black pepper is the dried, matured but unripe fruit of a perennial climbing vine cultivated as a plantation crop. It is obtained by harvesting spikes when fruits are fully mature and start yellowing or become yellowish. The berries are removed from spikes by rubbing, threshing or tampling, and sun-dried for a few days. When completely dry, the outer skin of the berries become dark-brown to black and gets shrivelled. Before drying, if the berries are kept in boiling water for about 2 min., a glossy uniform black product is obtained on drying. Heat treatment arrests enzyme activity and dried product has better keeping

POST-HARVEST TECHNOLOGY AND STORAGE

quality and a fresher aroma. The various value-added products obtained from black pepper include dehydrated green pepper, freeze-dried green pepper, frozen green pepper, white pepper, green pepper in brine, pepper oil and oleoresin, ground pepper, organic pepper, sterile pepper and canned tender green pepper. White pepper is obtained from berries by harvesting them when they have become ripe, i.e. the berries are yellowish red or red in colour. It is prepared by removing outer coating of seeds either before or after drying. White pepper is also prepared by decortication of dry black pepper mechanically.

necessary to prevent capsules from splitting during drying. After harvesting, cardamom is processed within 24-36 hr to avoid deterioration. Processing includes pre-treatment, drying, cleaning, packing and grading. The freshly harvested fruits are washed in water to remove dirt. Washing capsules with sodium-carbonate solution (2%) for 10 min. cleans capsule as well as helps in retaining green colour during artificial drying. In alkali wash, capsules may again be washed once or twice in freshwater, and water is drained off before drying capsules. The capsules are dried either in sun or in a drying chamber. A certain amount of bleaching takes place during drying and capsules attain a straw-colour. Capsules are. sometimes also bleached by exposure to sulphur-dioxide. Bleaching improves appearance of pericarp and keeping qualities of cardamom. However, it reduces percentage of volatile oil in seeds. Cardamom-seeds have a pleasant aroma and a characteristic pungent taste. They are used as spice and in medicine. The value-added products of cardamom are green cardamom, cardamom oil and oleoresin. After drying, cardamoms are rubbed by or with a rough coir-matting or a piece of wiremesh for cleaning, a process known as garbling. After cleaning, capsules are sorted according to their size and colour. Cardamom for export is graded into 34 grades, of which about 6 grades of Alleppey Green type and 3 grades of Coorg Green are normally exported. Grading is done on the basis of bleached and decorticated cardamom also. As green cardamoms need protection from light and air during storage and packaging, they are usually stored in gunny-bags lined with black polyethylene sheet.

The unopened buds of cloves are harvested when they begin to turn pink. While harvesting, care is taken to avoid breakage of branches; otherwise it would adversely affect succeeding growth. The harvested flower-buds are separated from clusters by brushing against open palm and are spread evenly on mats or concrete floor for sun- drying. The lot is transferred to a sheltered place during night to avoid re-absorption of moisture. Drying is complete in 4-5 days. The correct stage of drying is decided when bud is dark brown and the rest is lighter brown in colour. Well-dried cloves weigh one-third of their original weight. Drying is the single important operation in clove processing, which decides its quality. For international trading, cloves are normally packed in double-jute sacks of 50-60 kg capacity. The preferred packaging for clove oils is lacquer-lined 200 or 220-kg capacity stainless steel-drums. Polyethylene containers are also used for smaller quantities, but are not recommended for long-term storage. Oleoresin is normally packed in plastic pails of 25-kg capacity but the size may vary. The safe moisture content, free from mould growth for whole cloves, has been reported 6.5% at an ambient temperature of 25-28°C and 30% of relative humidity.

Z

Nutmeg and mace are two spices of the same tree. Nutmeg is the seed of the plant and the mace is the aril that surrounds the seed. The fruits are ripe and ready for harvesting when pericarp splits open. Harvesting is done by a knife attached to a stick, followed by drying. The fresh pericarp can be used for making pickles, jams and jellies. The mace is carefully removed, flattened and dried, during which it turns brown. The nutmeg is also dried. The most important constituent of nutmeg and mace is the volatile oil, which forms 4-15% of mace and 7-16% of nutmeg. Nutmeg yields 24-30% fixed oil, also known as nutmeg butter. Both mace and nutmeg are used for flavouring foods, generally mace for savoury and nutmeg for sweet dishes. The volatile oil is used for flavouring foods, dental preparations, essences, confectionery, vegetable dishes and beverages. Both have medicinal properties and are used as drugs.

Coriander is an annual herb, grown mainly for its fruits, which when dried is the spice known as coriander-seed. Both, seed and foliage of coriander are aromatic. Good-quality seeds contain more than 0.7% essential oil. The foliage is generally not distilled. The fresh coriander leaves are usually used in curry and many other Indian recipes. Dried coriander is extensively used for both bulk and flavouring sausages and meat products and in some bakery and confectionery items. Some coriander seeds are distilled to give its essential oil, which has both fragrance and flavour. For preparation of coriander dal, a product used as adjuvant in supari (betelnut), the seed is dehusked and flaked. After flaking, heat treatment is given to seeds, followed by salting. The treated seeds are eaten as highly flavoured digestive chew. The traditional method of seed preparation consists of soaking coriander-seed overnight in salt-water, partially drying and hand pounding. The process gives 20% dal and 20% brokens as compared with 40% dal and 10% brokens obtained by a modified process developed by the CFTRI, Mysore.

Ginger is the dried underground stem or rhizome, irregular in shape. Its crop is harvested in stages depending upon the type of product required. The tender rhizome, sold as green ginger for preparation of preserves or pickling, is harvested from the fifth month after sowing. The crop for dry ginger is harvested after about 8 months. The rhizomes are marketed as such or after peeling or scrapping of the epidermal layer. In the latter case, the peeled ginger is washed and then sun-dried. When white, polished rhizomes free from specks or spots are required, the peeled ginger is soaked in a solution of lime and then dried. In some cases lime-treated rhizomes are further treated with sulphur-dioxide. The processing of ginger consists of washing, peeling, drying or curing, polishing, pulverization and storage. The indigenous methods of peeling of ginger are very labour-and time-consuming and result in high losses of material and quality. The abrasive brush-type ginger peeling machine developed by the RAU, Udaipur, along with polisher and pulverizer is very useful equipment for small-scale processing. As seed-rhizome is stored usually for 120—150 days and it is susceptible to attack by soil-borne fungi and insects as well as white ants, proper storage of ginger is essential. Keeping seed-rhizomes in pits is found one of the best methods of storage. The value-added products of ginger are ginger oil, oleoresin, candy, preserves, vitaminized effervescent ginger powder, plain effervescent powder, starch from spent ginger, ginger brandy, wine, beer, medicinal beverages, encapsulated ginger oil and

POST-HARVEST TECHNOLOGY AND STORAGE 839

Turmeric is also a rhizome, which is cured for the development of colour and aroma. It is used as an essential ingredient of curry powders. The post-harvest operations of turmeric include washing, blanching, drying, polishing, pulverization, packaging and storage. Earlier some cowdung was added during its cooking to intensify the colour of the product. However, in modern processes, the rhizomes are boiled in lime water or sodium-bicarbonate solution. Drying is done in sun, and after cleaning, rhizomes are polished mechanically in a rotary drum. Cured and finished turmeric is brittle and has a striking yellow colour. On steam distillation, turmeric gives 1.5% essential oil. On solvent extraction followed by removal of the solvent, an oleoresin containing all the aroma and flavour is obtained. The various value- added products of turmeric are curcuminoids, dehydrated turmeric powder, oil and oleoresin. R&D institutions have developed equipment like turmeric boiler, dryer, polisher and pulverizer.

Cinnamon is the inner bark of the young shoots of the cinnamon tree, which contains 0.5-1% volatile oil. The leaves of cinnamon are valued for oil. Leaf oil varies from 1.6 to 2.7%, bark oil from 1.67 to 2.88% and bark oleoresin from 11.89 to 19.14%. Leaves and tender twigs are steam distilled for 1-2 days or oil distilled for 7-8 hr under 6.80 kg pressure. One hectare crop yields 200-300 kg bark and 35 kg leaf oil per year. The bark is used as a spice in the form of small pieces or powder. It is aromatic, astringent and stimulatory. It is also used for flavouring confectionery, liquors, pharmaceuticals, soaps and dental preparations. The bark oil is also used as a flavouring material.

Fenugreek is the dried ripe fruit of an annual herb. The fresh tender leaves and shoots of fenugreek are rich in minerals and vitamins (A and C) and are eaten as vegetables. The seeds are small, hard, smooth and oblong, and yellowish-brown in colour. They contain many substances like proteins, starch, sugar, mucilage, mineral matter, volatile oil, fixed oil, vitamins and enzymes. As a spice, fenugreek adds not only to flavour but also to nutritive value of the food. The seed possesses medicinal properties and thus has medicinal use.

Garlic is a bulb made up of several cloves enclosed within white or pink skin of the parent bulb. It is used in chutneys, pickles, curry powder, curried vegetables and meat preparations. It has a strong flavour and antibacterial and anti-insecticidal activities. Peeling, bulb breaking, clove peeling, dehydration and grinding are the major post-harvest operations. The RAU, Udaipur, has developed machines for bulb breaking and clove peeling, besides processes for dehydration and powder-making. For preparation of value-added products, whole garlic-bulbs are broken into cloves (using garlic bulb-breaker). The cloves are then sun-dried for 3-4 days for reducing moisture content from 50 to 5.2%. Then cloves are peeled with a clove-peeler. Peeled garlic cloves are dried in solar cabinet dryer before dehydration. No blanching or any other treatment is given to garlic-cloves. Garlic powder can be prepared by size reduction of dried cloves, using a domestic grinder. After grinding, it should be immediately packed and sealed hermetically. Polyethylene bags (500-gauge) and plastic containers (PET) are found good for 3 months storage of garlic powder at the ambient conditions.

840 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

COMMERCIAL CROPS

Sugarcane, cotton, tea, tobacco and jute and mesta are the major commercial crops.

Sugarcane contains 12-15% sugar (sucrose, glucose and fructose), and 80-90% of its production is used for manufacturing white sugar, jaggery (gur) and khandsari. The sugarcane processing industry in India consists of 434,6000 animal-operated and 189,700 power-operated sugarcane crushers in addition to 564 sugar mills. White sugar is obtained as raw-sugar or as refined sugar. It is made by crushing sugarcane and extracting juice by pressure. The juice from mills is dark green in colour, turbid and acidic (pH 5.0-5.4). The sucrose content varies from 10 to 18%. The juice is strained through fine screens to remove particles of fibres and suspended matter. Next, sufficient milk of lime is added to neutralize acids present, and it is heated to boiling point. The lime and heat treatment cause coagulation of colloidal substances (mud or scum). The hot juice is then run into clarifiers for sedimentation of mud and decantation of clear juice. The clarified juice, which is yellow to brown and contains 85% water, is evaporated in multiple-effect evaporators to a syrup containing 75— 85% sucrose. Sugar is crystallized from syrup in single-effect vacuum pans. Crystals are separated from massecuite (mixture of crystals and mother liquor or molasses) by centrifugation.

The raw sugar so obtained consists of brown crystals with an adhering film of molasses. It contains 96-97% sucrose, 0.75-1% reducing sugar and 0.5-0.75% moisture; the remaining being organic non-sugars. In refining, raw sugar is dissolved in water and solution is filtered through charcoal, which absorbs colouring matter and some other impurities. The de-colourized solution is then evaporated in multiple- effect vacuum pans, as done during raw sugar production, until sugar crystallizes. The massecuite is separated into crystals and syrups, and crystals are dried in revolving drums or granulators through which a hot current of air is drawn. In refined sugar, the size of the crystals is important and crystals are screened into granulated sugars of different coarsenesses. In India most of the sugar manufactured from sugarcane is white for direct consumption. In this case, sugar is made from cane-syrup directly without intervening step of making raw sugar. The lime-treated cane juice obtained as in the manufacturing of raw sugar is treated with sulphur-dioxide (sulphitation) or carbon-dioxide (carbonation). The former process is more commonly practised in India. The rest of the process is mostly a repetition of raw-sugar-manufacturing process. Sulphitation produces a near-white to yellow sugar, and carbonation gives a whiter product comparing favourably with refined sugar. The recovery of sugar varies from 9.5 to 11.5%.

In sugar industry more sucrose is recovered due to higher juice extraction, but some minerals and free monosaccharides considered important for health and nutrition are lost. In jaggery-making, sucrose recovery is relatively low due to low juice extraction, but it is supplemented by recovery of reducing sugar and minerals, which make it more nutritious and health-friendly. Jaggery and khandsari production in India is one of the major food industries, which provide employment to more than 25 lakh people directly, and to millions indirectly. About 2 million tonnes of khandsari from 5,000 khandsari plants and 10 million tonnes of jaggery from about 80 lakh

POST-HARVEST TECHNOLOGY AND STORAGE

crushers spread all-over in the rural areas under decentralized sector are produced in the country. These meet about 40% of the requirement of the total sweet consumption in India. In addition, byproducts such as bagasse and molasses from khandsari and scum from jaggery plants are also obtained.

Juice recovery, clarification of juice, storage and packaging of Jaggery are important unit operations in jaggery-making. Jaggery being an important food product and having health-friendly characteristics as well as medicinal values is being exported to many countries like Bangladesh, Britain, Canada, Chile, Egypt, Fiji, Iran, Iraq Kuwait, Malaysia, Nepal and the USA. It has very good export potential in the form of solid, granular and liquid products.

Cotton

Cotton has been in cultivation in India since times immemorial. At the time of Independence, about 0.7 million tonnes were produced, comprising mostly short and medium-staple cotton. However, the present production is estimated around 30 million bales. There are 2,000 single-roller gins and 60,000 double-roller gins, besides 400 saw-gins, housed in 3,000 ginning factories. Due to lack of modernization and repeated use of outdated machines, ginning of cotton has resulted in high-trash incidents, increased power consumption and low productivity. However, the CIRCOT, Mumbai, has conducted various studies to improve productivity by adoption of improved equipment like pre-cleaners. Several cotton-processing equipments with improved designs have come into vogue like ERM-cleaner and CLENOMAT system. New processing technologies like rotter spinning, DRE friction spinning and air-jet spinning have been introduced. The rotter spinning has made a mark already in the industrial scene, with about 6,00,000 rotters at present compared with 60,000 rotters by the end of eighties.

The byproducts and waste of cotton plant have various applications. Cotton-seed is a rich source of edible oil, protein and linters. At present, India is exporting a major portion of its cotton seeds as cotton seed-meal, but there is a potential for protein enrichment by developing a commercial method for manufacture of this value- added product. In the place of conventional hydrogenation process, the recent trend is to attain the same through controlled inter-esterification of oils. This can be achieved by means of chemicals as well as enzymes. Super-critical carbon dioxide extraction is another new emerging technology. However, gossypol is an unwanted substance present in cotton-seed oil. Presently it is removed as a waste. No efforts have been made in India to utilize it, though China is reported to be using it directly or in the form of some derivatives as contraceptive and anti-viral agent. Cotton-linters are a unique source of cellulose for specialized applications. Cotton-plant stalks could be utilized in place of wood for production of a variety of products, viz. particle-boards, fibre-boards, writing and printing-grade papers and corrugated-boxes. Technologies for such applications as well as for production of biogas from willow-dust, a textile- mill waste, have already been developed in India.

Tea

Tea is a stimulating beverage, increasingly being used all-over the world, with India being one of the major tea producers. Weathering, rolling, fermentation, drying,

sorting and packaging are major unit operations involved in processing of tea leaves. The tea-making process begins with weathering of freshly plucked leaves. The process consists of inducing leaf with ambient or warm air to lose about half of its moisture during 10-18 hr, after which the leaves become flaccid. If the leaves are not flaccid, undue quantity of watery juice would be squeezed when rolling, resulting in a loss of essential solids. For weathering, green leaves are spread on wire-mesh of troughs and air is blown through leaves using a fan. Leaves are stirred from time to time for uniform removal of moisture. Rolling of weathered leaves is carried out by crushing, tearing and curling them on CTC machines, which rupture cells of tea leaves. The main operation in manufacturing of black tea is enzyme oxidation, normally known as fermentation. This affects liquor quality and cuppage. Fresh tea leaves contain 20% solid matter, nearly half of which includes insoluble substances like crude fibre, cellulose, protein and fats, which undergo changes during fermentation process. Under controlled conditions, the fermentation process influences colour, brightness and briskness of liquor. It also imparts mellowness to brew. The colour of leaf mass changes from green to a bright coppery red. After achieving optimum fermentation, it is necessary to destroy enzyme; therefore the leaf mass is exposed to hot air in a dryer. This helps in its sorting and packaging and later storage. The desired moisture content in the dried product is approximately 3%, suitable for storage and transit. Coal or oil-fired driers are commonly used for this purpose. The dried mass contains a mixture of particles of different sizes, ranging from dust to 5-cm long and 1.3-cm wide leaves. Particles are sorted using multi-sieved machines. The three main sizes are brokens, fanning and dust. Under each of these, the grades are sorted out. A chest is used for packaging, which acts as a preserver of freshness and protector of quality, besides facilitating easy storage and transport. Overpackaging or underpackaging is strictly avoided, and aluminium lining and tissue papers are used to prevent taints.

MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS

India is one of the largest milk producers in the world, with an output of 108 million tonnes valued at Rs 1,700,000 million. Approximately half of its production (about 45%) is consumed as liquid milk, and the rest is processed into various milk products such as butter, ghee, cheese, paneer, khoa, dried milk products and fermented milk products, etc. Spoilage of milk during collection and handling and at users level is not uncommon due to lack of adequate refrigerated handling and storage facilities. To ensure safe milk, free from disease-producing bacteria, toxic substances and foreign flavours, fresh whole milk needs to be processed before marketing or consumption. Processing helps in producing milk that has an initial low bacterial count, good flavour and satisfactory keeping quality. Milk-processing operation consists of clarification, separation, pasteurization, and homogenization. The clarification removes all dirt, filth, cells from udder and some bacteria, but it does not remove all pathogens from milk. The clarified milk is pasteurized to rid the milk of any disease-producing organisms it may contain and to reduce substantially the total bacterial count. Two methods are employed for pasteurization: one method which is a batch process, consists of holding every particle of milk for 30 min. at 61.7°C (sometimes at 62.8°C), followed by rapid cooling. In the other method, known as high temperature short time (HTST) method, the milk is held for not less than 15

POST-HARVEST TECHNOLOGY AND STORAGE

sec at 71.7°C. Ultra-high temperature treatment at 115-130°C for 2-4 sec is also employed. As pasteurized milk is not steriled, it must be quickly cooled to prevent multiplication of surviving bacteria. Pasteurization does not produce any objectionable cooked flavour and does not lead to any important change in nutrition except for a slight decrease in the heat-labile vitamins like thiamine and ascorbic acid. The shelf- life of milk is increased by pasteurization. Homogenization is the process of making a stable emulsion of milk-fat and milk-serum by mechanical treatment and rendering mixture homogeneous. This is achieved by passing warm milk or cream through a small aperture under high pressure and velocity. High-pressure homogenizers and low-pressure rotary-type homogenizers and sonic vibrators are used for this purpose. Sterilization is the heat treatment given to milk to increase its keeping quality. It is done at 115°C for 15 min. and at 145°C for 3 sec.

Various milk products, viz. flavoured milk, fermented product, skim milk, concentrated milk products like evaporated milk, sweetened condensed milk, dry milk, cream etc. are also produced and consumed in India. Butter, cheese and ice- cream are western milk products largely consumed in all parts of the country. In addition, ghee, curd, khoa, rabri, malai, kheer etc. are our traditional milk products. There are 791 milk and milk-product processing units in India.

MEAT AND MEAT PRODUCTS

the chief ones being cattle, sheep and pigs. It also includes glands and organs of these animals. Meat products include many of the by-products from animal slaughter such as animal gut (used for sausage casings), fat from meat (used in manufacture of lard), gelatin and others. The estimated demand for the present population is 3.8 million tonnes as against the present production of 2.3 million tonnes. The perhead consumption of meat in India is 2.0 kg per annum. Most of it is consumed fresh. The steps involved are lairage, stunning, bleeding, scalding and evsceration. Ageing or ripening is done by holding meat at a temperature of 0.5 to —2°C in cold-room for periods varying between 1] and 4 weeks. During ageing, humidity of the cold room is controlled and meat is covered with wrapping to minimize drying and weight loss. The ageing of meat may also be affected by holding it at a higher temperature for a shorter time, usually 20°C for 48 hr. Ultraviolet light is also used to keep down surface bacterial growth. Beef is usually the only kind of meat that is commercially aged. Tenderizing meat is another important operation, which is done by using mechanical methods, enzymes and salts. In the mechanical method, pounding, cutting, grinding, needling or pinning and use of ultrasonic vibrations are done. These methods cut or break muscle fibres and connective tissues. Wrapping of meat in papaya- leaves before cooking also makes it tender. The curing of meat has various objectives, viz. bringing about modification of meat, which affects preservation, flavour, colour and tenderness due to added curing agents. However, it also has some detrimental effects during storage. The pink colour of nitrite-cured meat changes to brown in presence of oxygen. The salts of the cured meat enhance oxidation of lipid components and thus reduce its shelf-life. Smoking is another process that was earlier used as method of preservation, but today it is used mostly for its flavour contribution and coagulation of proteins. Slow smoking is preferable, since extended period enables

more drying to occur on the surface. The smoke contains compounds having antiseptic properties, which destroys microorganisms present in the meat. It also prevents development of rancidity in meat. There are about 3,600 licensed slaughter-houses operating in the country. At present about 165 licensed units are engaged in processing and preservation of animal meat in addition to 144 pork-processing units.

FISH

India occupies fourth position in fish production in the world, with an estimated production of 6.9 million tonnes (3.9 million tonnes inland and 3.0 million tonnes marine). About 0.61million tonnes fish and fish products are exported, with an export turnover of Rs 7,899 crore. Fish is an excellent source of protein and phosphorus but low in iron. However, being a highly perishable commodity, it needs to be cared from the moment of catch till cooked for table purpose or processed in factories for preservation. Spoilage begins as soon as fish dies, which affects appearance, odour and texture. In India, with its tropical and subtropical climate, the problem of spoilage is acute, because heat and moisture promotes its deterioration. Fish tissue is generally more perishable than animal tissue, and this is true even under conditions of refrigeration. Both the appearance and the odour of a fish are clues as to its freshness. Freshly caught fish at a temperature of 16°C remains good for handling for a day. On ice at 0°C, fin-fish may remain good for 14 days. But this is not true for all species. The reasons for fish spoilage are microbiological, physiological and chemical in origin.

Various methods, viz. drying, salting, smoking, freezing and canning, are used for preservation and processing of fishes. Sun-drying is the most common and ancient method. However, this is not a hygienic process. Also, there are appreciable losses due to putrefaction and spoilage. The dried fish develops a peculiar odour. Salting (pickling) is also widely used in India, for which dry salting or wet salting are used. These methods are rather crude and primitive. Case hardening, rancidity development, colour changes, mould growth and attack by insects and mites are some of the common defects of fishes cured by sun-drying and salting. The current methods of importance for preserving the quality of fish are freezing and canning; out of which former is not yet widespread in India. Only 372 fish processing units are reported in India.

Fish meal, fish flour and fish oil are the products obtained from fish. The fish meal is used as an animal-feed, flour for protein enrichment of human food, and fish oil for feeding and industrial purposes etc.

POULTRY AND EGG

The term poultry refers to domestic fowls reared for their flesh, eggs or feathers and includes chicken, ducks, geese, turkeys, guineas and pigeons. Of these, chicken and turkey are most commonly used. Poultry is marketed in ready-to-cook form. Poultry meat is known for the nutritional and organoleptic qualities. The head, feet and entrails are removed to get dressed chicken. Dressed chicken is graded before it is marketed. Grading takes into consideration bird prior to its slaughter, during evisceration and packaging. The dressed chicken is cooked before its consumption. The cooking method is selected on the basis of tenderness of the poultry and its fat content, both influenced mainly by the age of the bird. Moist heat methods are applied to older

and tougher birds to make them tender and palatable. Dry heat methods are applied to young tender birds. Tandoori chicken is a well-known and popular Indian chicken dish. The cooking is done in a clay oven, called tandoor.

Egg production has become a good cottage industry in India, with vast scope for expansion. The egg production is 50.7 billion and the country ranks third in production. If proper care is not taken the quality of egg deteriorates rapidly and its food value is adversely affected. A number of factors constitute egg quality, which include size and shape of egg, and condition of shell, albumen, yolk and germ spot. Egg must be clean and dry. Eggs whose quality has been determined are graded for marketing purposes. The grading is done according to size and quality, which are independent of each other. Eggs subjected to varying temperature deteriorate more quickly than eggs held at the constant temperature. Hence for household purposes they must be kept under refrigeration, where they will keep well for 1-2 weeks. Clean eggs maintained at a temperature of—1°C and a relative humidity of 80% can be stored for as long as 6 months without any deterioration. Storage of eggs under carbon dioxide minimizes carbon dioxide loss. A more common method of slowing deteriorative changes in eggs during storage is to spray them with some mineral oil. Thermo-stabilization is another method of prolonging its storage life. Freezing is one of the food-processing methods. Frozen egg-white retains its qualities fairly well; yolk and whole egg cannot be frozen satisfactorily. Drying is another method of egg preservation, and there is a demand for egg powder for the preparation of commercial egg products. The white yolk or whole egg after pasteurization may be dried by any of the several methods of drying. Spray drying is the most common method utilized for this The powdered is cooled, collected and packaged.

MUSHROOM

Mushrooms are an excellent source of proteins, vitamins and minerals. They contain 90% moisture and are highly perishable. However, they are an exotic source of vegetarian protein food. India produces 37,000 tonnes of mushrooms, out of which 90% is white-button mushrooms. Deterioration starts immediately after their harvesting; hence mushrooms need preservation, for which storage in fresh condition, drying, canning, pickling or preservation with salt and acetic acid are processing- cum-preservation techniques used. Shelf-life of mushroom can also be extended by controlled atmosphere storage. In drying, mushrooms are blanched and steeped before drying. Mushrooms are used for chutneys, pickles, soups, ketchups, snacks, chips, pakora, curry, soup-powder preparation etc.

HONEY

Honey is an enjoyable food on account of its flavour, taste and nutritive value. It has the capacity to retain water and hence cakes and candies made with honey remain moist for a longer period than those made with other sweetening agents. After extraction of honey from hives, it is strained through muslin-cloth or sieve and then allowed to ripen, during which air-bubbles escape. For shelf stability, further processing is required to minimize fermentation occurring due to high moisture and presence of yeast and to prevent granulation.

Honey granulates during winter when glucose separates out in crystalline form. It

is a natural process and granulated honey can be returned to liquid form by careful indirect heating in hot-water bath. Liquefaction is also done by heating at 65°C for 30 sec by heat exchangers and cooling to 4°C before packaging. Pressure filtration is also practised.

There are more than 760,000 bee-keepers in India, and the national production of honey is 65,000 tonnes per annum. Bee-keeping in artificial hives offers an immense potential for providing employment to rural-folk in India, where many evergreen and moist deciduous forests, orchards etc. constitute good bee-keeping areas. The unique feature of bee-keeping is its requirement for low capital investment. The equipment required bee-hive, honey-extractors, uncapping knives, smokers, feeders and queen excluder are all locally available.

FLOWERS

Flowers and floriculture are integral part of human-living. Ornamental plants play a very important role in environmental planning of urban and rural areas for aesthetic importance, abatement of pollution, social and rural forestry, wasteland development, and landscaping of outdoor and indoor spaces. Presently, floriculture has become an important agri-business with very high potential for export trade.

India has a very rich heritage for flower cultivation. Traditional flowers like jasmine, scented rose, chrysanthemum, tuberose, crossandra and marigold are cultivated in several parts of the country. The total area under floriculture in India is around 114,000 ha, which constitutes 17% of total global area (acreage). However, production and marketing of flowers is highly disorganized. The pre-and post-harvest losses in traditional flowers are very high because of their perishable nature and lack of infrastructural facilities, viz. packaging, storage and transportation. The traditional flower industries need strengthening by diversifying traditional products.

MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS

The plant-based pharmaceuticals, herbal medicines, perfumery, cosmetics, fragrances and food-flavour industries have recorded a phenomenal expansion in the last decade, and as the result this sector figures in high annual growth-rate industries in agri- business. The market for plant-based pharmaceuticals in 1994 was estimated at US $ 120 billion. The essential-oil production in the world at raw-materials level was estimated to be around Rs 32 billion, of which 50-60% goes to food flavours, 15— 20% to fragrances and the remaining is broadly used as starting raw materials for isolation of aromatic chemicals. In terms of market share in production value, India is sliding downwards and presently stands at sixth rank, with only 6% share. The export earnings could be increased by innovations in development of efficient post- harvest technology for increasing productivity and quality improvement. In medicinal plants, efforts are needed to develop testing procedures, analytical facilities to meet stringent international standards and product or process development for low-cost chemicals, both from raw materials and their by-products.

TRADITIONAL FOODS

The country has a very strong base of traditional food products, which have been developed under varied agroclimatic, geographical and socio-cultural situations over

POST-HARVEST TECHNOLOGY AND STORAGE

centuries. Besides conventional chapattis, these may include expanded, puffed, flaked, extruded and fermented products, sweets, instant mixes, breakfast foods, bakery products, beverages, health and special foods. The production of traditional foods is estimated to be nearly 30 times more than that of all the western-style high-cost processed foods in the Indian market. However, there is an urgent need to put scientific and technological inputs to promote industrial manufacturing of such products. There can be a substantial domestic and export demands for such products. Production of Bikaneri bhujia, dal moth and petha for exports and frozen idli for domestic markets are some of the successful examples.

GRASSES AND FODDER

The harvesting of grasses and fodder crops is also one of the important farm operations. In forage production, the time taken in harvesting of the crop, its transportation, chaffing and other handling operations are the most significant factors influencing total fodder production both in quality and quantity. The critical period of forage growth when nutritive value of the crop is maximum is rather limited and any delay in its harvest causes tremendous losses in terms of its feeding value. The bulk of the material is generally so great that through manual labour their critical period of harvest, processing for feeding and conservation is more than often surpassed considerably, thus making losses inevitable.

The losses in grasses due to late harvesting are more significant because of the in- built traditional practice in vogue since ages. About 20% dry matter and 50% crude protein are wasted every year due to late harvesting and unscientific conservation practices. Alternative feed resources could be developed through pelletization. Number of machines like forage-densifying machine, hay wind rower-cum-rake, forced-air batch-type hay-drier, mechanical hay-drier, feed-processing mill, feed pelletizer, baling machines and ammonia-treatment machines have been developed by the R&D institutions in India for improving quality of harvested biomass.

STORAGE

Most of the problems related to post-harvest aspects of food materials could be traced to their perishability. Perishability is responsible for high post-harvest losses and marketing cost, market gluts, price fluctuation and other similar problems in the marketing of fruits and vegetables, meat, fish etc. Storage is an interim and a repeated phase in the complex logistics of transporting agricultural products from producers to processors and from processors to consumers. Besides, agricultural products like foodgrains need to be stored from one harvesting to next, thus demanding additional carryover as safeguard against a following crop of low yield or poor quality against speculation in price and market demand or against shortages and famines.

Losses during storage operation alone account for 3-5% of production in foodgrains and as high as 20-30% in fruits and vegetables. Value of investment and efforts needed to produce this much lost food materials stands very high, and hence efforts have ever been continuing to reduce storage losses in foodgrains, perishables and semi-perishable food products.

The storage losses are both qualitative and quantitative, affecting nutritive value of the products. Insects, rodents, spillage and fungal rot are the main culprits in

foodgrains. Use of insecticides and pesticides in this connection is effective to reduce losses. However, their use may introduce chemicals into food chain, substituting one problem for another. Moisture and temperature control are also necessary. The storage structures may be temporary or permanent, above or below the ground, and flat or upright structures. The grains may be stored in bulk or in bags. The storage structure may be bins, silos or godowns. The commonly used structures at farmer’s level are made of straw, mud or bamboo which are neither airtight nor insect proof, resulting in 3-25% losses. Metal bins made up of GI (galvanized iron), aluminum or MS (mild steel) sheets have become very popular for domestic-level grain storage. Concrete bins and silos are also popular. They have advantages of being air-tight, durable and fire-proof, and are practically maintenance free. However, compared with steel metallic structures, they have higher capital cost, greater weight and some difficulty of adoption for different storage conditions.

For on-farm grain storage, Pusa bin, composite plastic bins and metal bins have been developed and are being utilized. For large-scale storage, facilities are available with Food Corporation of India and Central and State Warehousing Corporations. Several designs of rural godowns have been developed and are being used. The present system of foodgrains storage in India is not only costly, it is also quite wasteful, quantitatively as well as qualitatively, and is often inappropriate. A large majority of the producers are very small operators; after keeping some grains for home consumption and seed they are left with only small quantities to sell, and whatever quantities they have to sell are normally disposed in a very short post-harvest period of 6-8 weeks. Overwhelmingly large proportions of the produce reaches markets in the very short span of this post-harvest period. Given this situation, huge quantities of the produce reaching the markets have to be purchased, stored and disposed of by the traders and the public agencies. Only limited quantities are purchased and taken away by the consumers directly. If public agencies intervene, their handling, storage and distribution costs escalate beyond reasonable limits primarily due to inherent inefficiencies and overhead cost involved. Various public agencies involved escalate economic cost of handling disproportionately.

Crops like maize or sorghum are stored as cobs. The prevailing high humidity during harvesting of these crops is perhaps the main reason for open storage. The crops like paddy, wheat, barley and pulses are stored in closed structures.

The perishable products like onion, potato, fruits and vegetables are harvested at very high moisture content of 60-88% (wet basis), which limits their shelf-life. In potato, pit-storage method is popular in Maharashtra. In this method, potato is heaped in a pit to a height of about 1 m and covered with a thick layer of straw or grass. At 30-60 cm distance from the pit, a ditch is made and filled with water occasionally. If temperature is high, water is sprinkled on the cover of the heap. In pit storage, losses during 2 months of storage are 5.5%. The CPRI, Jalandhar, and CIAE, Bhopal, have developed storage structures for potato utilizing evaporation technique for their cooling.

Onion is another important perishable crop, whose storage at farmer’s level poses problem in India. Relative humidity during storage has more serious influence on keeping quality of onions than any other factor. Under low humidity and high temperature conditions, bulbs continue to lose moisture relatively at a constant rate.

POST-HARVEST TECHNOLOGY AND STORAGE 849

High humidity in storage can be disastrous. Respiration of bulbs also results in continued loss of stored food (dry matter) and in production of heat. Although respiration rate of onion-bulb is much lower than of most other vegetables, there is a considerable loss of dry matter when bulbs are stored for longer periods. The losses in onions are maximum during rainy period. Several types of local storage structures used for onion have serious problems which lead to 50-80% losses. R & D (research and development) institutions have developed split-bamboo storage structures, ventilated bamboo structures, natural air-ventilated structures and forced-air ventilation-type onion-storage structures. Split-bamboo storage structures have also been developed for garlic storage.

The JARI, New Delhi, has developed a low-cost, zero-energy cool chamber, which has become very popular for temporary storage of several fruits and vegetables. Commercial storage of fruits and vegetables involves use of low temperature with regular atmosphere or modified atmosphere or controlled atmosphere. In controlled atmosphere, the atmospheric components are precisely adjusted to specific concentrations, whereas in modified atmosphere no effort is made for controlling atmospheric components at specific concentrations once a package has been hermetically sealed.

At low temperature, perishability is considerably reduced, and shelf-life of perishable products is increased. This realization has led to the present importance of cold storage or refrigeration in the preservation and marketing of most of the perishable foods. The first cold store in India was established in Kolkata in 1892. However, significant progress in expansion of cold storage industry in the country has been made only after Independence. The present-day capacity of cold storage in India is 23.0 million tonnes: Uttar Pradesh has the maximum number of cold stores with total capacity of 9.0 million tonnes, followed by West Bengal with 5.3 million tonnes and Punjab with 1.4 million tonne capacities. The total number of cold stores in India are 5,200.

Potato is the most important commodity that is presently placed in the cold stores, accounting for as much as 88% of the total installed capacity in the country. About 8.3% cold-storage facility is of multipurpose type while remaining 3.7% is being utilized for other perishables, viz. fruits, vegetables, meat, sea-foods, and dairy and poultry products. This clearly shows that there is enough scope for expanding the cold-storage facility in India.

AGRO-PROCESSING OR FOOD-PROCESSING INDUSTRIES

Conventionally an agroindustry is said to be an enterprise that processes agricultural Taw material. The degree of processing may vary tremendously, ranging from cleaning and grading to milling, cooking, mixing and chemical alteration that create a textured food of biological origin. Warehousing, chilling plants and cold storages are also included in agroindustries, since they enhance storability and economic value. The agroindustries in India may be subgrouped as agro-processing (rice-mills, dal-mills, oil-mills, fruit-canning, dairy-product processing, cotton-ginning, sugar-mills, gur and khandsari units), agro-input manufacturing units (viz. compounded fertilizers, insecticides and pesticides formulations, agricultural-implement and processing- equipment manufacturing) and agro-service centre to undertake repairs and servicing

of farm machineries and equipment. These industries especially agroprocessing or food-processing industries contribute significantly to a country’s economic development in 4 ways, viz. (i) they are a nation’s primary method of transforming raw agricultural products for consumption; (i) they often constitute majority of nation’s manufacturing sector; (iii) agro-industrial products are the major export items; and (iv) a food system provides nation with nutrients critical to well-being of expanding population.

In Indian context, the agroprocessing industries have enormous potential of providing food security, increasing employment potential and income-generating opportunities at the production catchments in the rural areas.

However, the major problems faced by food-processing industries in India are: (i) low capacity utilization; (ii) poor recovery of finished products from raw materials; (iii) improper arrangements of adequate working capital and its managements; (iv) low product quality; and (v) poor reliability of assured power supply.

An important issue in this reference is the absence of linkage between industry and farmers of raw materials. Currently most agroindustries depend upon the normal trade channel for their supply, which often results in the industry getting only the left-overs of the market. This is very acute in the horticulture-based industry. To ensure that industry gets the right quality and quantity of raw materials at the appropriate time, the most suitable method in the Indian context appears procurement ‘of raw materials directly from farmers through contract farming. Experiments made by some companies in this regard have been eminently successful.

Extent of mechanization in post-harvest operation

The machines and equipment are one of the important inputs for production and processing. During the last two and half decades, the growth of processing equipment and machines has been quite rapid, as is the case with other agricultural machines. Mechanization increases efficiency, enhances value of products, achieves timeliness of operation and reduces drudgery. The mechanization is taking place predominantly in those operations where traditional practices have failed to deliver desired level of productivity. Thus for post-harvest operations, equipment for cleaning and grading, rice and dal milling, and oil extraction have become more popular compared with other operations. With current growth rate, the mechanization in post-harvest operation reached to respectable levels of 70% in oil-milling, 76% in groundnut-shelling, 67% in dal-milling, 78% in maize-shelling and 90% in rice-milling in 2005. But in other unit operations like drying and cleaning, it may not exceed respectively 2.5 and 2.3% in spite of rapid increase in population of driers and cleaners. To increase this level of mechanization, greater credit allocation by financial industries will be required.

Salient research achievements

Some of the important research achievements in post-harvest technology in India include following.

1. Determination of optimum stage of harvesting for higher grain yield and better milling characteristics for various food crops like high-yielding varieties of rice, sorghum, groundnut, greengram, Bengalgram, redgram and fingermillet in different agroclimatic regions.

POST-HARVEST TECHNOLOGY AND STORAGE 851

. Studies on the effects of chemicals on yield to hasten process of grain maturity with higher yield.

. Design, development and evaluation of processing equipment like groundnut strippers (drum and comb-type), crop-covering structures (for protection of heaped harvested crop from untimely rain), storage structures (to minimize the storage losses of foodgrains at farm level), crop driers (including solar and agricultural waste-fired driers), hand or paddle-cum-power operated seed treators, grain-cleaners, graders, dehuskers, shellers and decorticators, milling equipment (for small-scale operation), viz. multipurpose grain mill, da/-mill, pearlers, leaf-grinder, pyrolyser and briquetting machines (for utilization of biomass as fuel), straw-baler and feed-treatment structures, rice-puffing machine, sago roaster-cum-drier, ginger and furmeric polisher, pea peeling- and-punching machine, chilli-seed extractors or vegetable-seed extractors, garlic-bulb breaker, cashewnut and water chestnut decorticators and honey extractor.

. Jute plant ribboner, accelerated and eco-friendly retting of jute, grading of raw jute and instrument for quality evaluation, diversified jute products, geo-textile, jute stick particle board for increasing the income of jute farmers and for promoting diversified use of jute.

. Technololgy for cotton ginning, ball hardness tester, neural network for cotton fibre purity; variable speed double roller gin, improved micro spinning system, process for flame retardent finish for fabrics, cotton coir composites, pulp and paper, particle board and corrugated boxes from cotton plant stalk, biogas from textile mill waste.

. Process for preparation of shellac, bleached lac, dewaxed and decolourised lac, lac dye and wax from factory effluents, perfumery compound, natural dye and herbal tea from kusum petals, lac wax based emulsion formulations for extending shelf life of fruits and vegetables.

Besides, technologies have also been developed for enhancement of shelf-life of fruits and vegetables, processing and preservation of sapota and ber, development of cereals and pulses-based papaya powder. The CFTRI, Mysore, has been a pioneer and premier research institution devoted to R & D in post-harvest technologies of agricultural produce for transforming them into value-added products. Various ICAR institutes and agricultural universities have also contributed significantly towards developments of appropriate technologies on the post-harvest aspects of various crops produced in India.

Future thrust

Following are some suggested thrust areas for research and development in post- harvest technology

* Development of cool chains for preserving perishable horticultural commodities from their point of origin to point of consumption.

* Standardization of technology for frozen and osmotically dehydrated fruits and vegetables.

* Development of low-cost, eco-friendly and low-energy cool chambers for on- farm storage of horticultural products.

852 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

Technology upgradation in processing of cereals, pulses and oilseeds for higher recovery, better quality and energy efficiency.

Better economic utilization of agricultural residues, wastes and byproducts.

R&D in frontier areas, application of cryogenic processing, fabricated foods and feeds through extrusion processing, modified atmosphere packaging and controlled atmosphere packaging (MAP and CAP) for extending the shelf-life of fruits and vegetables etc.

Production of biocolours, bio-drugs, bio-fertilisers, bio-fuels from agro-residues and processing byproducts.

Sincere efforts directed towards development of unconventional food sources like tissue-culture, algae and fungi etc.

Adoption of latest technologies to inject greater efficiency, which could provide economics of scale and cost effectiveness. Those technologies are needed to be introduced which can add value at the reasonable cost, because the premium of processed foods over fresh fruits and vegetables may not be very high if large demand is to be generated.

Development of industries for extraction of floral oils and pigments and of dry flowers and honey which may prove to be fortune industries with unlimited prospects, vast resources and varied products. A turnover of Rs 1,500 million is projected in dry flower trade alone. Due attention is needed to cater to needs of floriculture and apiculture industries. :

As the involvement of private sector in diversification and commercialization of agriculture is very crucial, they should have proper forward linkage with processing industry and backward linkage with farmers or producers. The NGOs may also be involved in transfer of technologies to farmers, especially women farmers and small-scale processors.