SOURCE_DOCUMENT: Chapter 21.pdf

21. Biological Control of Crop Pests

India loses approximately 18-30 % of the crop yield due to pest attacks each year valued at Rs 900-1,500 billion. Biological control is the best way to manage the crop pests as it checks pests by their own antagonists in an eco-friendly manner, like a cat feeding on a rat. The use of Oecophyila, the ant predator, for controlling caterpillar pests is known from biblical times. Biological control assumed importance in the late 1800s and international efforts were made to introduce biological control agents from one continent to another. Efforts to conserve the local biological control agents have also progressed. In several crop ecosystems, natural antagonists provide about 60% protection from crop pests. Biological control agents have tremendous potential to manage a variety of pests in different crop ecosystems.

Biological control agents

The biological control agents or antagonists of the pests are: predators (ladybird beetles, lacewings, predatory bugs, ants, spiders, reptiles, birds, mammals and others); parasitoids (parasitic wasps and flies); entomopathogenic micro-organisms (bacteria, fungi, viruses, protozoa and nematodes); and fungal and bacterial antagonists of plant diseases and phytonematodes.

Predators

In general, predators tend to feed on prey smaller than themselves, except when they release a powerful poison, use a trap or hunt in groups. Predators are free-living and require several preys to complete their life-cycle. Some examples are dragonflies, damselflies, ground beetles, ladybird beetles, syrphid flies, spiders, mites, shrews, monkeys, toads, frogs and birds like crow, cuckoo, wood-pecker, blue jay, stork, mynah, sparrow, etc.

Coccinellid beetles, commonly known as ladybirds, are hemispherical in shape and brightly coloured, bearing distinctive spots and stripes. Based on the number of spots, they are commonly called two-spotted, seven-spotted, etc. The female deposits oval or spindle shaped, white to orange yellow eggs near the food source in clusters or alone on the underside of leaves or in crevices of bark. The grubs are alligator-shaped, flat and dark, with orange, blue or black patches with tubercles and spines and feed on insects, and complete development in about 20 days. The pupa completes development in 3-10 days. Coccinellids feed on aphids, scale insects, mealy bugs and mites. In the laboratory, efforts to multiply them on semi-synthetic diet on large scale have not been successful, limiting their mass production and utilization in a big way. Further, aphidophagous coccinellids disperse on release, limiting their field efficacy. The grubs and adults are voracious feeders. In India, the Vedalia beetle, Rodolia cardinalis, was introduced in 1929-30 to control cottony-cushion scale (origin: Australia) on Casuarina and other crops. The beetle established and provided satisfactory control of this pest. The Vedalia beetle, which was first introduced from Australia in 1888 and established

BIOLOGICAL CONTROL OF CROP PESTS 647

on cottony-cushion scale in California, is now established in more than 60 countries, providing satisfactory impetus for biological control as the major tool of pest management. By and large, scale feeding lady beetles have been more successful than aphidophagous species in applied biological control.

Australian ladybird beetle (Cryptolaemus montrouzieri) was introduced in India in 1898 for the control of green scale (Coccus viridis). It did not establish initially, but was recorded later on several species of mealybugs and sac-forming scale insects on several commercial, horticultural and plantation crops. A simple mass-production technique involving multiplication of common mealybug on ripe pumpkin and exposing such pumpkins to the adult gravid female beetles has been developed. The technology was transferred to end-users through the ICAR Lab-to-Land Phase I Programme. The beetles are now widely used for the management of mealybugs and scale insects in south India. Depending on the crop density or canopy, 10-50 beetles/release/plant or tree or vine are enough to manage the target pests. Coccinellids Pharoscymnus horni, Chilocorus nigrita and Stichlotis madagassa have been used on the sugarcane scale insect Melanaspis glomerata, but without great success.

Ground beetles hunt for caterpillars and pupae. The fiery searcher, Calosoma himalayanum consumes gypsy moth and other larvae day and night and in its development period of 2 weeks, each beetle is capable of consuming 14-50 mature larvae.

The introduction and inoculative release of exotic ladybird beetle (Curinus coeruleus) in 1988 has given spectacular control of exotic psyllid (Heteropsylla cubana) and saved the subabul plantations (which are used primarily as fodder and fuel) in south India.

Green lacewings (Neuroptera: Chrysopidae) are another very common and important predators of crop pests. Green lacewings with long antennae and bright, golden eyes are active fliers, particularly during the evening and night with characteristic fluttering flights. The female lays small (<1 mm), pale green, oval-shaped eggs at the end of long silken stalks, which ultimately turn grey. The larvae are creamy or brownish with well-developed legs and pincer-like jaws with which they suck the body fluids from prey. Larvae grow from <1 mm to 6-8 mm. The larva spins a parchment-like silken cocoon from which the adult emerges. Chrysoperla spp. (carnea-group), Mallada desjardinsi (=M. boninensis), Apertochrysa crassinervis and Dichochrysa astur (=Mallada astur) are the most common chrysopids in the Indian region. The first two have been used in cotton ecosystem against aphids and other soft-bodied insects. Chrysoperla spp. (carnea-group) have been recorded on cotton, greengram, sorghum, maize, safflower, sunflower and pigeonpea, predating on pests like safflower aphid, safflower fruit fly, lepidopterous eggs, thrips and several other soft-bodied insects. The common green lacewing, Chrysoperla carnea, widely reported in Indian literature, is actually not present in India. The species of the carnea-group, however, occur in India, but these are morphologically alike and can be reliably identified only by analyzing the mating song of both sexes. Efforts are on to acoustically characterize the carnea-group of species of Chrysoperla in India, so that the right species for particular geographic regions can be identified. The species commonly occurring in peninsular India has been identified as Chrysoperla zastrowi arabica recently by acoustic analysis of the mating song.

Anthocorid bugs, the minute pirate bugs, play an important role in the management of thrips, aphids, eggs and young larvae of moths. They particularly manage pests on floral parts. They not only feed on their preferred hosts, but also incapacitate many of them. Sunflower is one of the favourite abodes of anthocorid bugs. Orius tantillus, O. maxidentex, Cardiastethus exiguus, Blaptostethus pallescens and Xylocoris flavipes are some of the important species studied in India for biological control of pests on various crops. These could be used to control thrips and mites in polyhouses / protected cultivation.

Syrphids or hover flies have been recorded as important predators of aphids on several crops. They are more active in mild climates. A technique for mass production of an important syrphid (Ischiodon scutellaris) has been evolved which can facilitate its large-scale use in mustard and other crops.

Predatory mites (Phytoseiulus spp. and Amblyseius spp.) are important in controlling phytophagous mites in several crop ecosystems.

Parasitoids

_ Each parasitoid requires only one host, which it kills for its development into a free-living adult. Parasitoids are of the same size as the hosts, or sometimes even smaller.

The female parasitoid lays eggs inside or on an insect host. Legless larvae on hatching feed on the hosts internally (endoparasitoid) or externally (ectoparasitoid), but avoid vital organs until later in their development. Either a single (solitary) or more than one larva (gregarious) may successfully develop in each host. The thin skin, host tracheae, and perforations in the host skin help in larval respiration. The waste matter is also stored as urates, often visible in the larva as white spots in the fat body and expelled at the time of pupation.

The adult food of the parasitoid is different from that of larvae. Many adult parasitoids feed on nectar or pollen and serve as important pollinators.

The female parasitoid generally prefers inert egg or pupa or sluggish caterpillar or nymph for oviposition. The hind legs of chalcid wasps are designed for grasping the host for oviposition. The female (e.g. Goniozus nephantidis, Bracon spp.) also uses its ovipositor for injecting venom to paralyze the host or tunnelling the tissues to reach the borers and place eggs with precision into the body of host (some ichneumonids have 30 mm long ovipositor). The female also uses the ovipositor for tapping the host’s body to assess whether the amount of food available is sufficient for its offspring.

In the field, purplish eggs containing trichogrammatid or scelionid parasitoids, shining or blackish mummies of aphids containing parasitoids (Aphidius, Aphelinus), sluggish lepidopteran larvae ultimately yielding to one or several cocoons of parasitoids, flies and wasps emerging from lepidopteran pupae, and parasitoid Epiricania clinging to adult hoppers indicate the diversity of parasitism.

Parasitoids may be specific or polyphagous. The host-specific parasitoids are generally preferred for classical biological control for the management of introduced (exotic) pests. Polyphagous parasitoids such as minute egg parasitoids (Trichogramma spp.) are mass-produced and used for the management of a variety of lepidopteran tissue-borers and leaf feeders. Similarly, tachinid flies are used for managing the late larval and pupal stages of lepidopteran pests. Some tachinids deposit their eggs on the

BIOLOGICAL CONTROL OF CROP PESTS

host plant, which are ingested by caterpillars while feeding. The grubs hatch in the digestive canal, and bore and enter the body cavity to feed and develop. Others directly lay eggs on the body of the caterpillar.

Trichogrammatid egg parasitoids have been used during the active egg-laying period for management of Chilo spp., Scirpophaga excerptalis and Acigona steniellus on sugarcane, C. partellus on maize, S. incertulas on rice, Helicoverpa armigera, Earias spp. and Pectinophora gossypiella on cotton and H. armigera, Agrotis ipsilon, A. segetum and A. biconica on several crops. Trichogrammatids are released @ 50,000 / ha on sugarcane, @ 75,000 / ha on maize, @ 50,000-100,000 / ha on rice and @ 150,000/ha/release on cotton to provide 4-6 Trichogramma/m’. Besides direct control, Trichogramma releases may also have a preventive effect, providing benefit not only to the current period of utilization, but also to successive years of crop cultivation.

Trichogramma chilonis has been released successfully in Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, Gujarat, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra and other states. It has given 56-82% protection against the sugarcane tissue-borers. Several co-operative sugar mills have their own Trichogramma production units to cater to the needs of sugarcane farmers. 7: chilonis has been released area-wise on sugarcane, cotton, sunflower, sorghum, groundnut and maize against Chilo spp. and H. armigera; T. japonicum on sugarcane and rice against Chilo spp. and S. incertulas, and T. chilonis Bio H3/T. pretiosum against H. armigera on several crops.

It is important to correctly identify the species of trichogrammatids used in biological control so that the desired degree of control is achieved. The species purported to be “T. brasiliensis” used in India is actually T. pretiosum as the type of the true brasiliensis actually belongs to Trichogrammatoidea. The results of the crossing experiments, morphological evidence and the molecular characterization of the ITS-2 region of the DNA have proved this beyond doubt. Similarly, “7. evanescens” used in India has been found to be ZT. brassicae as proved by molecular and morphological studies. Epiricania melanoleuca has been used for control of Pyrilla perpusilla on sugarcane.

Entomopathogens

Entomopathogens are disease-causing organisms (such as bacteria, viruses, fungi and protozoa in insect pests), which kill their hosts or debilitate the future generations. Under certain situations, they cause disease epizootics in the field, e.g. Verticillium lecanii on scale insects, nucleopolyhedrovirus or Nomuraea rileyi in lepidopterans. The infected insects are unable to feed properly, remain stunted, lose their body colour, and get immobile or paralyzed. Dead insect-pests are often found hanging on the plants, or a fungal growth on the body of the dried insect could be easily located in the field. The pathogens involved in causing disease in insects, mites and phytonematodes, and antagonists suppressing diseases are further briefly described and discussed here.

Entomopathogenic bacteria

They are extra-cellularly associated with insects and enter the body cavity through contaminated feed and multiply. Bacteria can also invade through integument of the insect injured by pricking of parasitoids and infections caused by protozoa or nematodes. Death of the insect may either occur due to intoxication, sudden lack of

650 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

oxygen, chemical changes in the gut or by the toxins or crystals produced in the bacterial cells. In India, Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. kurstaki was isolated from Helicoverpa armigera from Mysore, Karnataka in 1955. Subsequently B. thuringiensis subsp. kenyae (ISPC-I, ISPC-7), B. thuringiensis subsp. tolworthi (HD-2), B. thuringimsis subsp. thuringiensis (HD-263), B. thuringiensis subsp. kurstaki (HD-709, ISPC-4, H3a, 3b, 3c), B. thuringiensis subsp. aizawai (HD-549, ISPC-l), B. thuringiensis subsp. tenebrionis and B. thuringiensis subsp. israelensis (VCRC B-17, B-113, IPS-80, H-14) have been identified. Many B. thuringiensis subspecies infect lepidopterans, but B. thuringiensis subsp. tenebrionis infects coleopterans and B. thuringiensis subsp. israelensis (VCRC B-17, B-113, IPS-80, H-14) infects dipteran insects. A sporeless mutant of Btk-PIPU7 was developed at Bengaluru with relative safety to silkworm and found highly effective against H. armigera. Bacillus thuringiensis and its subspecies have been recorded infecting more than 68 species of insects, mainly lepidopterans.

Bacillus thuringiensis (3-6 micron long, gram positive rods and an irregular chromatic network) are the true insect bacteria. This was discovered in 1911 as a pathogen of flour moths from the province of Thuringi, Germany, and was used as a commercial insecticide in France in 1938, and then in the USA in fifties. In India, B. thuringiensis is now commercially produced through fermentation technology. Solid-state fermentation technology has been developed in India to produce Br on locally available low-priced materials and farmers and farmwomen are trained to produce Bt at village level. This product costs 6-8 times less than the commercial products available in the market.

Several commercial products based on B. thuringiensis and its subspecies are available and marketed worldwide. In India, Agree, Bioasp, Biolep, Lepidocide, Biotoxibacillin, Dendrobacillin, Biobit, Dipel 8L, Delfin, Halt and Spicturin are available and are widely used for controlling lepidopteran pests. The Br subsp. israelensis and Bt subsp. sphaericus control mosquitoes.

Commercial powder or liquid forms of B. thuringiensis are applied at 0.3 to 0.5 kg/ ha. The number of applications is decided based on the availability of young larvae. Tank mixing with adjuvants such as boric acid 0.025% or neem seed-kernel extract at 2% was found to enhance the efficacy of By. It is recommended for the suppression of H. armigera on tobacco, sunflower and pulses; Achaea janata on castor, S. litura on tobacco and beetroot; and Adisura atkinsoni on field beans. Higher concentrations (1- 1.25 kg/ha) of specific strain have been used for suppression of S. /itura on castor, cotton bollworm complex (Earias insulana, E. vittella, H. armigera and Pectinophora gossypiella) and Cnaphalocrocis medinalis on rice.

Paenibacillus popilliae is produced by infecting live white-grubs. Sporulation completes in 14-21 days and the infected grub develops a typical milky appearance. P. popilliae has been registered in the USA since about 1950, the first registration of any insect pathogen as a microbial control agent. Products such as Doom, Milky Spore, Grub Attack and Grub Killer have been marketed in the USA. In the India, P. popilliae is used against several species of white-grubs including Holotrichia consanguinea and Leucopholis concophora on groundnut and L. /epidophora on sugarcane. P. popilliae is applied @ 0.5-1.0 kg/ha. It is applied in endemic pockets of white-grub infestation either at the time of planting or spot inoculated by incorporating in the soil. For proper distribution of spores, 2 g spore dust (containing 200 million spores)

BIOLOGICAL CONTROL OF CROP PESTS

is deposited with spacing of 3.05 m. The spore dust can also be applied in furrows at the time of sowing. Once established, P. popilliae spores kill the grubs for 15-20 years. Each grub that dies from milky spores decays and releases 3 billion new spores. Once all the grubs are destroyed, the spores will remain dormant but viable in the soil until new grubs come along even years later.

Since 1996, a wide range of crop plants have been genetically engineered (transgenics) to contain the delta-endotoxin gene from B. thuringiensis. In the USA, transgenic com, potato, cotton and soybean are available. In India, only Bt cotton has been commercialized.

Baculoviruses

Most insect viruses end up with proteinic occlusion bodies (POBs) of different sizes and shapes in different organs or cells of the infected host insect. The occlusion body comprises virus particles, single or in groups, as rod or spherules. Among the most studied and utilized viruses are the ones which infect lepidopterans. Currently, insect pathogenic viruses such as nucleopolyhedroviruses (NPVs) and granuloviruses (GVs) are widely used in pest control. The NPVs are specific to host species or genus (exceptions in India are NPVs of Mamestra brassicae and Galleria mellonella). The GVs are more specific than NPVs, but are reported only from Lepidoptera.

The NPVs are irregular, spherical, cubic or hexagonal crystals with blunt or melted edges. These are deposited in the nuclei of the fat body cells. Each polyhedron measures 3-10 microns in diameter and contains many particles or virus rods. The virus rods are alkali sensitive (measuring 20-50 millimicrons thick and 200-400 millimicrons long). The NPVs hold good promise for use in the field. Over 25 NPVs have been recorded from their respective insect hosts. Nucleopolyhedrovirus of Adisura atkinsoni on pigeonpea, lab lab and field beans has been used successfully. In addition to the above, NPV of Amsacta albistriga and A. moorei on groundnut and pulses have been found to have good potential and induce natural epizootics in the field for many years after application.

Commercial formulations of NPVs of pests such as old world bollworm and tobacco caterpillar are widely available and used by the farmers. Addition of optical brighteners, tannic acid, boric acid, jaggery, etc. improves the effectiveness of NPVs.

For the control of H. armigera on chickpea, groundnut, Egyptian clover, tobacco and sunflower, Hear-NPV is recommended at 1.5 x 10!? POB/ha (250 LE / ha); for pigeonpea 1.5-3.0 x 10!” POB / ha (250-500 LE / ha) and for cotton 3.0 x 10'? POB / ha (500 LE / ha) is recommended. It is sprayed along with 1% jaggery and 0.1 % ranipal at an ETL of 7 second-instar larvae / 20 plants. Based on H. armigera population, 2 to 4 sprays are given. The virus suspension can also be safely and effectively combined with several insecticides at reduced dosages like neem seed-kernel extract (NSKE) and endosulfan for increasing the efficacy. It has also been used in combination with egg parasitoid, Trichogramma spp. and predator, Chrysoperla sp.

For the control of S. litura on crops such as tobacco, groundnut, blackgram and cotton, the first spraying is given as soon as the eggs start hatching and subsequent sprays are given at 7-10 days interval. The dosage varies from 1.5 x 10'? to 3 x 19” POB / ha (250 LE to 500 LE/ha), 1% crude sugar, and 0.01 % Teepol is added before applying in the field. Subsequent sprays could be altered with 2% neem seed-kernel

extract sprays. In tobacco nursery, 3-5 sprays are given. Castor is used as a trap crop around nurseries. The Sp/i-NPV could be sprayed on castor as soon as the eggs start hatching and the spraying could be repeated at weekly interval. The quantity of water added is reduced to one-fourth in case power sprayer is used for spraying. Formulation of Spli-NPV as 1% wpe using wetting agent (Adinole T-73) and anti-caking agent (hydrated calcium flurosilicate) increased the pathogenicity of the virus.

The GV-infected insects contain 0.3 to 0.5 micron long oval granules. Each granule contains only one virus rod in occlusion. The hemolymph of the infected caterpillar turns milky-white. In India, over 21 GVs have been recorded from their respective insect hosts. The GVs of lepidopterans are quite promising for utilization against their respective host. GV of sugarcane shoot-borer Chilo infuscatellus has been successfully used against this pest on sugarcane.

Non-occlusion viruses are spherical, do not form occlusion bodies or polyhedra and their particles are distributed in infected tissues. Mostly they are cytoplasmic, but some are located in the nuclei of the infected insects.

The fungi attacking insects belong to Phycomycetes, Ascomycetes, Basidiomycetes and Deuteromycetes. Only about 20 species have received more attention for use against insect - pests, as these are amenable for biological control, being easy to produce and relatively low priced.

Entomofungal pathogens are popularly known by different names, depending on the colour of the fungus as white muscardine, green muscardine, brown muscardine, red muscardine, yellow muscardine or even black muscardine. The spores of the fungus directly penetrate the integument of the pest and the body cavity is attacked. The fungus with its mycelium and spores cover the body of host. Hirsutella and Verticillium are imperfect forms of various Cordyceps species. Among entomofungal pathogens, Beauveria bassiana against rice hispa, Dicladispa armigera and lepidopteran tissue- borers of sugarcane, Metarrhizium anisopliae and Beauveria brongniartii against Holotrichia serrata and Leucopholis lepidophora on sugarcane and Holotrichia consanguinea on groundnut, Verticillium lecanii against Aphis spp., Hirsutella thompsonii on coconut eriophyid mite and other mites infesting several crops, Nomuraea rileyi against Spodoptera litura on crucifers, castor, groundnut, pigeonpea, cotton, etc. and Helicoverpa armigera on cotton, groundnut, pigeonpea have been found promising. Natural epizootics of N. rileyi were recorded from H. armigera and S. litura from cotton, groundnut, pigeonpea and other crops along with B. bassiana. These are the only natural enemies, which could withstand widespread pesticide onslaughts in Andhra Pradesh. Promising isolates of N. rileyi (Nr-3, 7, 12, 17, and 26) have been identified and oil formulations have been found to be particularly effective against H.armigera, S.litura and other lepidopterans.

Most of the entomopathogenic fungi can be grown on a variety of solid substrates or in static liquid cultures or deep tank fermentors, using low-priced and inexpensive liquid media. Coconut water, the waste in copra industry, has been successfully used for the mass production of Metarrhizium anisopliae. B. bassiana, V. lecanii and M. anisopliae and other entomofungal pathogens can be grown directly on solid organic substrates like rice, rice bran, wheat, wheat bran, sorghum, millets, oats, barley, maize

BIOLOGICAL CONTROL OF CROP PESTS

meal, maize cobs, soybean mash, groundnut hull meal, potato, carrot, etc. Mass production techniques have been standardized using these substrates. Use of potent strains during favourable climates of high humidity and low temperature is the key to successful utilization of fungal pathogens in the control of crop pests.

The green muscardine fungus, M. anisopliae, is generally a soil-inhabiting fungus, recorded on white-grubs and wireworms. The mass cultured fungus is applied to cattle dung pits @ approximately 42.5 x 10'° spores/m?. After the onset of monsoon each year, cultures of two bottles (80 ml) containing 10°-10"' spores are mixed with one litre water and sprinkled on a one m? breeding medium with the help of a sprinkler, used for watering. The fungus is then mixed thoroughly in cubic meter area by spade. For white-grub management, the fungus is applied in water suspension in endemic areas when the grubs are active feeders. The treatment of all endemic areas during humid or cool season on community basis gives better results. For other pests, the fungus is applied in water suspension. The spores are mixed with 0.05% Sandovit. In case of sugarcane pyrilla, apart from spray, the live adults are infected in the insectary and released in the field during humid period. The adults continue to spread the inoculum.

The spray solution is prepared by mixing spores of the fungus @ 6 parts of powder in water in the evening hours. The crop is thoroughly covered. The contents of 30 polyethylene packets are enough for treating one ha. The entomofungal treatment is highly effective against Spodoptera spp. and semiloopers in different parts of the country on soybean, groundnut and other crops.

Entomopathogenic nematodes

Entomopathogenic nematodes (EPNs) (steinernematids and heterorhabditids) directly attack the insect-pests. The invasive larvae of EPNs carry the associated bacteria Xenorhabdus sp. or Photorhabdus sp. in their gut, which not only kill the invaded host within 24-48 hr, but also produce a biostatic substance that retards the putrefaction of the cadaver. The nematodes feed on these bacteria and are capable of producing several generations in their dead hosts. The EPNs are susceptible to desiccation, but are important natural mortality factors of cutworms (Agrotis spp.) in irrigated fields.

High humidity is a prerequisite that enables EPNs to find their hosts. The EPNs are promising against several insect-pests in cryptic habitats such as white-grubs, gram pod-borer, rice stem-borer and other lepidopterans. From India over 60 species/strains have been recorded. Steinernema thermophilum has been recorded by the Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi and a ready-to-use product has been developed. Since 1996, extensive countrywide explorations conducted to quantify the diversity of EPNs yielded, Steinernema carpocapsae from Bengaluru, Madurai, Rajahmundry, S.bicornutum from Delhi and Jorhat and Heterorhabditis indica from Bengaluru, Coimbatore, Chidambaram, Kanyakumari and Aligarh. Based on morphology, morphometrics and rDNA-ITS- RFLPs confirmed existence of the several species/strains such as Heterorhabditis bacteriophora, H. indica, H. indica PDBC EN 6.71, H. indica PDBC EN 13.22, H. indica PDBC EN 13.3, H. indica PDBC 13.4, A. indica PDBC 14.2, H. indica PDBC EN 14.3, Heterorhabditis sp., Heterorhabditis sp. PDBC EN 3.5, Steinernema abbasi, S. abbasi PDBC EN 3.1, S. bicornutum, S. bicornutum PDBC EN 2.1, S. bicornutum, PDBC EN 3.1, S. bicornutum PDBC EN

3.2 , S. carpocapsae, S. carpocapsae PDBC EN 1.3, S. carpocapsae PDBC EN 1.4, S. carpocapsae PDBC EN 6.11, S. carpocapsae PDBC EN 6.61, S. carpocapsae PDBC EN 6.71, S. carpocapsae PDBC EN 11, S. carpocapsae PDBC EN 13.1, S. feltiae, S. glaseri, S. masoodi, S. pakistanicus, S. seemae, S. siamkayii, S. tami, S. tami PDBC EN 2.1, S.riobrave, Steinernema sp., Steinernema sp. PDBC EN 3.4, Steinernema sp. (SSL2) PDBC EN 7.2, Steinernema sp. (SSL2) PDBC EN 13.21, PDBC EN 14.1 and Steinernema sp. SSL2 from India.

These isolates have been found potential against major lepidopterous pests such as H. armigera, S. litura, Opisina arenosella, Agrotis ipsilon, A. segetum, A. biconica, Leucinodes orbonalis, Holotrichia consanguinea, Leucopholis sp., Chilo partellus and Plutella xylostella in the laboratory/field. The use of these in humid ecosystem has often given highly encouraging results. The EPNs in general have proved effective against soil-inhabiting insect-pests and tissue-borers. The moisture in the soil must be high to achieve full benefits from EPN application.

During rainy season, mermithids (Ovomermis albicans, Ovomermis sp., Hexamermis sp., Rhabditis sp.) invade several insect-pests, the eggs laid by the nematode in the soil hatch and the larvae creep on the plants and are ingested by the insect-pests. The thread-like larvae grow inside the body of the insect and attain a length of more than 10 cm. The coiled larvae drop on the soil sometimes along with their dead hosts and the cycle starts once again when the mature females start depositing eggs.

Protozoa

Several protozoa parasitize insects and only Sporozoa and Cnidospora cause death of the parasitized hosts. Vairimorpha sp., Farinocystis tribolii, Nosema sp., Mattesia dispora, Bacillidium sp., Microsporidium sp. and Tetrahymena sp. were often recorder from several crop pests. Mattessia sp. and Vairimorpha sp. are potential parasites of Helicoverpa armigera and Schizogregarine Farinocystes tribolii is potential for suppression of stored grain pest Tribolium castaneum. A species of schizogregarine has potential for suppression of white-grubs. The infection takes place within 72 hr of ingestion of contaminated food and water. Braconid and ichneumonid parasitoids transmit the spores of microsporidia through their contaminated ovipositor. Transovarial transmission also occurs.

Rickettsiae

Rickettsiae infect the fat body of insects such as flies (Diptera), beetles (Coleoptera) and grasshoppers (Orthoptera) and destroy the tissues. In the field, the rickettsiae- infected insects show white staining of their body and the hemolymph turns milky white.

Plant disease antagonists

These are the micro-organisms, which grow in association with plant diseases and manage them through competition, antibiosis, predation, hyperparasitism, mycoparasitism and other forms of direct exploitation. Several species of fungal genera Trichoderma, Laetisaria and Gliocladium and bacterial genera Pseudomonas, Bacillus and Streptomyces and their strains are available. Seed coating (5-12 g/kg seed) with Suitable antagonist (Trichoderma harzianum-PDBCTH 10, 7. viride-PDBCTV 23,

BIOLOGICAL CONTROL OF CROP PESTS

Pseudomonas putida-PDBCAB 19, P fluorescens-PDBCAB 2) to protect against root diseases in sugar beet, lentil, chickpea, sugarcane, pea, pear! millet, groundnut, gingelly, sunflower, cotton, blackgram, and have bright future.

Fungal antagonists — Trichoderma harzianum, T. viride, T. virens and Gliocladium spp.— have been successfully used for the management of soil-borne diseases of several crops caused by Pythium spp., Fusarium oxysporum, Sclerotium rolfsii, Rhizoctonia solani and Phytophthora spp. T. harzianum has been used as seed treatment against Sclerotium rolfsii on chickpea and sugarbeet, and Pythium aphanidermatum on sugarbeet. Soil amendment with Trichoderma spp. has been used for the control of Rhizoctonia solani on groundnut, Sclerotinia sclerotiorum on pea, Pythium aphanidermatum on mustard and P graminicola on sugarcane. Foliar application of Aspergillus nidulans has been used for the control of Colletotrichum corchori on jute. Similarly, bacterial antagonists—Pseudomonas fluorescens, P. putida, Bacillus subtilis, Streptomyces spp. and Agrobacterium radiobacter— have been successfully used for the management of the diseases.

Standardization of fermentation technology for Trichoderma spp. and other antagonists has been done. Formulations like alginate prills, pesta granules, vermiculite- wheat bran and talc-based products are being developed. Biological seed treatment and seedling dip with talc-based formulations have proved successful for managing wilts and root-rots of various crops. Antagonists multiplied on agricultural by-products by solid fermentation method can be directly amended to the soil for cost-effective management of soil-bome pathogens.

Antagonists of phytonematodes: For biological control of phytophagous nematodes, certain fungi, bacteria, protozoa, nematodes, tardigrades as predacious and oligochaetes-omnivores which digest nematodes, have shown potential. The microbial beneficial antagonists of phytophagous nematodes are usually applied by soil amendment through use of farmyard manure and mulches.

The fungi, Paecilomyces lilacinus and Pochonia chlamydosporia and the bacterium Pasteuria penetrans hold good promise and offer real possibility of biological control of phytophagous nematodes, particularly as no potential nematicides are available for field use. Burrowing nematodes and root-knot nematodes can also be managed by these bioagents. Some plant-disease antagonists also suppress the population of phytonematodes and they have potential for use in disease complexes.

Attempts are being made to utilize nematophagous fungi and bacteria such as Paecilomyces lilacinus, Pasteuria chlamydosporia and P. penetrans for the control of phytonematodes, particularly in conjunction with organic base. Paecilomyces lilacinus has been used against Meloidogyne incognita on chickpea and sunflower. The same antagonist has been used against Meloidogyne javanica on chickpea. Pochonia chlamydosporia and Pasteuria penetrans have been used against several nematodes on pigeonpea, chickpea and cowpea.

Antagonists of weeds: Biological control of exotic weeds such as water fern with exotic weevil Cyrtobagous salviniae; water hyacinth with Neochetina eichhorniae, N. bruchi and Orthogalumna terebrantis; parthenium with Zygogramma bicolorata; Opuntia vulgaris in north India with Dactylopius ceylonicus and Opuntia stricta and O. elatior in south India with D. opuntiae have proved effective in several areas of their release. Recently, the stem gall fly, Cecidochares connexa, has been introduced

in India against the siam weed, Chromolaena odorata. It has already established in some pockets, in and around Bengaluru.

Host-specific strains of local fungal or bacterial pathogens can be utilized for the biological control of weeds. Several fungal and bacterial pathogens from weeds have been isolated. The success achieved against Parthenium by using two rust fungi, viz. Puccinia abrupta vat. partheniicola and P. melampodii, in Australia can be emulated in our country also. Puccinia spegazzinii, the rust fungus of mile-a-minute weed, Mikania micrantha, has become the first fungal pathogen to be cleared for field release and evaluation in India and has been already released in Asom and Kerala. Recently, Trichoderma virens, which produces the phytotoxin viridiol, has been found highly effective in checking the germination and growth of parthenium. Fungi such as Fusarium pallidoroseum and Sclerotium rolfsii (Parthenium strains) are also potential candidates to keep this weed under suppression.

Host-specific strains of local fungal pathogens (A/ternaria eichhorniae, A. alternata and Cercospora rodani) can be utilized for the biological suppression of water hyacinth.

Biological control agents have been successfully used (alone or in combination with other methods) for the management of pests of rice, sugarcane, maize, tobacco, cotton and subabul.

FIELD RELEASE METHODS

Inoculative releases

An exotic organism is imported, screened in quarantine (to eliminate hyperparasites and diseases) and colonized in the field through inoculative releases. This type of suppression is generally advocated to combat an introduced pest. Once established, the control agents are self-perpetuating, providing long-term benefit to the growers. Under certain situations, single colonization or annual inoculative releases may not be effective and in such situations periodic releases are advocated.

Augmentation of natural enemies

When a native natural enemy is either not sufficiently effective or it is not effective in a particular season, it may be reared and released to augment its impact. Inundation is a method wherein the natural enemies are mass produced in a bio-factory and released at intervals for an immediate short-term result. Chrysoperla, Trichogramma, coccinellid beetles and pathogens are good examples of inundation.

Application of micro-organisms

; The strategies for use of micro-organisms for biological control are almost same as mentioned before, i.e. inoculative, augmentative and inundative. Antagonists like Trichoderma and Gliocladium spp. introduced with planting material such as seeds and seedlings to suppress damping-off and root-rots are one kind of inoculative release. Application of antagonists as amendments in nurseries is the usual tactic followed. Post-harvest dip of fruits in suspension of antagonists is yet another method of application of beneficial micro-organisms.

Examples of augmentative or inundative application of pathogens against target insect -pests include Verticillium lecanii against coccids and aphids, Beauveria bassiana and Metarrhizium anisopliae against numerous insect- pests. Spraying of baculoviruses

BIOLOGICAL CONTROL OF CROP PESTS 657

and entomogenous bacteria in evening hours is good example of augmentative application.

TECHNIQUES FOR EVALUATION OF NATURAL ENEMIES

The techniques for the evaluation of natural enemy efficacy are described here.

Qualitative

This method is useful against newly introduced pests or pests of previous known history. The evaluation of natural enemy release in the first case could be done by comparing the rate of spread, damage done by pest before and after the release or introduction, and in the second case, the inundative release effect is determined by comparing the damage of pest to that of previous years. In successful cases of classical biological control, this method is generally considered adequate, but in supervised augmentative or inundative releases, perhaps more precise methods of evaluation as given below may be desirable.

Quantitative

Regular sampling at fixed interval is done of the hosts and released natural enemies to determine the precise effect of release in suppression of the target pest. This could be either done by simply correlating the population fluctuation of host or released natural enemies or by analysis of life-table mortality data and the effect of environmental factors.

Most appropriate sampling techniques for each stage of the host and their natural enemies released have to be followed. Only a reliable sampling technique will determine the trends in population fluctuations of both host and natural enemies. A decrease in pest population during its active infestation period and increase in natural enemy population will be indication of success of the natural enemies released. This technique has certain disadvantages, i.e. removal of the field material while sampling, fluctuation of host and parasitoid population at each sampling, variability in duration of host stage due to parasitism, several separate attacks by a parasitoid on the same host material, and difference in availability of hosts. Another effective method of evaluation is the adoption of life-table technique, which provides a tabular accounting of mortality and its cause or causes for each insect stage during the crop period. The data for each mortality factor so collected are analyzed statistically or graphically, for correlation between pest density and changes in density and amount of mortality resulting from each measured mortality factor. Future population trend of the host and released natural enemy could also be predicted. Quantitative methods of assessment are often applied to quantify partial success obtained by release of introduced natural enemy or inundative releases. This helps to appreciate the return of efforts and to decide future attempts in this direction.

Experimental methods

The methods applied in the field for natural enemy exclusion are given here. Mechanical barrier method: \n this method, a cage, cloth sleeve, wire screen, or similar device is used to enclose an uninfested plant, branch, section of bark, or part of field plot and the pest is introduced into the protected zone. An adjacent infested

plot, either not enclosed or enclosed similarly as the above but with openings or other alterations in construction enabling free access of natural enemies, is used as a comparison check. In these situations, the protected pest population almost invariably tends to increase in density, while that in the unprotected check plot usually remains at the previous customary low level. The difference in density is ascribed to the action of the excluded natural enemies. An important limitation of the method is the variable environmental factors in different treatments.

Chemical exclusion method: In this method, a selective pesticide is used to eliminate or greatly inhibit the natural enemy, leaving behind the host infestation largely unaffected. Growth of the latter provides evidence of natural enemy effectiveness. The population could also be compared with that of the untreated plot. The advantages of this method over mechanical barrier method are free host dispersal; option for selecting large plot size and finally the microclimate is not modified.

Biological check method: This method, applicable only in certain limited situations, is based on remarkable symbiotic association between certain ants and some of homopterous pest species. These ants, in exchange of honeydew excreted by the homopterans (usually certain scale insects, mealybugs and aphids), tend them to protect them from attack by predators and parasitoids. The ants disturb parasitoids and predators. By restricting the ants from the infested tree or plant, either with a mechanical barrier or a tangle foot trap around the base of the trunk or main stem, the pest population is left untended and thereby exposed to full attack by natural enemies. If the natural enemy is an effective one, this results in a decline in the pest density. This could also be demonstrated by comparing the role of natural enemies in ant-attended plots.

Hand removal method: In certain cases, where the nest population is restricted to the plant due to the sessile nature of the pest, removal from the experiment plant or plant part (e.g. branch) by hand has been attempted. This effort continues for the duration of the test, which must extend long enough to produce a real difference between treated and check plots.

Trap method: In the trap method, an untreated central area is surrounded by a treated area where natural enemies that try to leave or enter the untreated area are killed. The effectiveness is determined by comparing the populations of host and natural enemy in untreated area with that of treated one.

INTRODUCTION AND EXPORT OF BIOCONTROL AGENTS

In India, so far 166 exotic biological control agents have been introduced of which 23 could not be released in the field, 71 recovered after release, 6 providing excellent control (recurring economic benefits worth millions of rupees in addition to environment protection), 7 substantial controls and 4 partial controls.

Recently biological control of spiraling whitefly, Aleuordicus dispersus, by its exotic parasitoid, Encarsia guadeloupae along with the action of several indigenous predators such as Axinoscymnus puttarudriahi, Nephus regularis, etc has proved successful on several host plants.

The solenopsis mealybug, Phenacoccus solenopsis, has become a major pest in several parts of India and Pakistan on several hosts, particularly cotton. Efforts are on to identify effective natural enemies to control this. Several indigenous coccinellid predators, the lycaenid, Spalgis epius; and some parasitoids have been found to exert

some degree of control. A species of Aenasius has been noted to heavily parasitize this mealybug and could prove to be a useful candidate in several countries.

The eucalyptus gall wasp, Leptocybe invasa and the erythrina gall wasp, Quadrastichus erythrinae have been introduced in India probably from southeast Asia and have assumed serious proportions in India, the former in most parts of India and the latter mainly in southem India. Efforts are on to control the eucalyptus gall wasp by introducing the exotic natural enemies from Israel.

With its diverse ecological zones and the great biodiversity, the potential of India as a source of natural enemies is very high. In the past, India has provided natural enemies for the control of several pests all over the world. The credit for the first classical biological control success goes to India, as way back in 1762, the common Indian myna, Acridotheres tristis, was exported to Mauritius, and it could successfully control the red locust, Nomadacris septemfasciata on sugarcane. Forty-six natural enemies from India have established in other countries and 26 are contributing extensively in improving the economy of the recipient countries on a recurring basis.

CONSERVATION OF BIOCONTROL AGENTS

Methods of conservation of natural enemies are presented as follows.

Rationalizing use of pesticides

Pesticides affect the natural enemies by repelling or reducing the longevity, fecundity and searching ability and decimating the population of the flying adults. Information has been generated on the safety of recommended concentrations of pesticides following initial toxicity tests in laboratory or semi-field conditions, persistence tests in semi- field conditions and finally determining the duration of harmful activity in the field. Such information is available for over 81 major natural enemies. Use of non-persistent insecticides reduces the duration of contact between the pesticides and natural enemies. In field crops such as cotton, instead of full coverage, skip row treatment with pesticides has given effective conservation of natural enemies. Application of granular pesticides to soil is relatively safe, avoiding direct contact of pesticides with natural enemies. If pesticide use becomes necessary, use of safe and selective ones is advised in minimum recommended dosages during specified time and in a limited area, Microbial pesticides may be substituted for synthetic pesticides.

Providing food and shelter

Suitable nesting boxes for predatory birds and wasps (Polistes spp.) and bird perches at suitable sites encourage the buildup of population of these predators. Burlap traps are effective in checking the adverse effects of ants attending mealybugs, particularly in the case of the coccinellid predator (Cryptolaemus montrouzieri). Rice gall midge may develop on alternate hosts during off-season so also its parasitoids, which may shift to the rice crop, thus providing early suppression. The weed Cyperus harbouring plant hopper Nisia atrovenosa helps in off-season survival of mirid predator Cyrtorhinus lividipennis. Pollen- and nectar-bearing flowering plants (Euphorbia, Phacelia and Eryngium) are planted on the bunds or wasteland to provide supplementary food to predators like chrysopids, coccinellids, predatory mites, syrphid flies and parasitoids. Flowers of wild carrot, wild clover and above-mentioned plants encourage the natural enemies that are residents of temperate ecosystems in general. Ageratum conyzoides

660 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

is encouraged in orchards to suppress other weeds and provide shelter and pollen for predatory mites.

Eggs of a pierid butterfly, Catopsilia pyranthe, laid on a wasteland weed Cassia occidentalis, are heavily parasitized by Trichogramma spp., which later migrate to neighbouring castor fields to parasitise Achaea janata eggs, thus serving as a natural biofactory. Interspersing C. occidentalis with Hybrid Cotton 10 resulted in very high rate of egg parasitism in bollworms Earias vittella and [Helicoverpa armigera and considerable reduction in bollworm damage.

Females of Bracon brevicornis, an ectoparasitoid, lived longer and laid more eggs, when fed on the nectar of the flowers of Lusticia gendarussa. Pectinophora gossypiella multipies on the weed, Sida sp.; generally natural enemies multiply in such unsprayed niches, the parasitoids of P. gossypiella could be released in such places to create reservoirs.

Beneficial management practices

Chisel ploughing conserves natural enemies of soil-inhabiting pests. Application of lime to the soils decreases the acidity and increases the incidence of NPV infection in noctuid pests. Manipulation of relative humidity and wetting periods (through crop spacing and irrigation practices) enhances the efficacy of Verticillium lecanii and other entomofungal pathogens. Use of organic manures conserves predacious arthropods such as carabid beetles and soil-borne microbial antagonists of insect-pests (white grubs, cutworms, wireworms), plant diseases and phytonematodes.

Epiricania melanoleuca is an important parasitoid of Pyrilla perpusilla. Population of this parasitoid is low in post-monsoon period and trash burning completely eliminates it. If one-third trash is saved and re-spread after burning the complete ratoon area, it leads to high rate of parasitism and low pest incidence. Several parasitoids, Epiricania melanoleuca, Ooencyrtus papilionis and Parachrysocharis javensis of P. perpusilla could be conserved if crop residues are left unburned. The redistribution and conservation of E. melanoleuca for the management of sugarcane pyrilla has proved to be a notable success. It was introduced in Gujarat, in 1982, from Maharashtra and Haryana, for the control of pyrilla on sugarcane; even after 15 years, it suppresses the population and provides 72% parasitism. The pyrilla population starts declining and within 30 days, a balance is struck when the population becomes less injurious (i.e. below ETL level). In 1999, there was an outbreak of pyrilla in 0.6 million ha in north India, perhaps due to indiscriminate burning of trash. However, the parasitoid overpowered the pest within 20 days and the spraying cost on 0.6 million ha which was Rs 480 million was saved by this natural control.

For discouraging the activity of hyperparasites, parasitoids should be released at a time when the activity of hyperparasites is the least. Releases of mass produced key biotic agents could be made during the active period of the pest to keep its population below economic injury level.

By placing bundles of rice straw, spiders can be attracted. Even retention of crop stubble as well grass weed heaps could contribute to maintain predator population. Keeping a part of refuge in net mesh cages to allow the emergence of parasitoids in the field but not the pest, is one of the best methods of conservation and enrichment of natural enemies. Placement of eggs of rice, sugarcane, corn and sorghum tissue-borers

BIOLOGICAL CONTROL OF CROP PESTS

as well as several other lepidopterans (laid in clusters) in wire-mesh cage permits the egg parasitoids to emerge but not the host larvae.

Overwintering eggs of Pyrilla perpusilla in sugarcane trash, hibernating larvae of Chilo partellus in stubbles of corn and sorghum are collected and kept in specially designed wire-mesh cages covered with meshes of different sizes. During spring, these cages are placed in the field. The parasitoids emerge to parasitize the respective pests early in the season but the hosts emerge and die in the cage itself. In villages, bamboo cages-cum-bird perches were used extensively which should now be encouraged with necessary modifications to make them more effective.

Tritrophic relationship between natural enemies, their hosts and host plants

Tritrophic relationships between natural enemies, their hosts and host plants have been determined. Parasitoids Hyposoter didymator and Telenomus remus preferred to parasitize Spodoptera litura larvae and eggs, respectively, on castor and beet root. Cotesia kazak preferred the host plant cotton, while Cotesia marginiventris preferred castor and cowpea and Eucelatoria bryani preferred cotton. Such studies have greatly benefited the release programmes in various crop ecosystems in appropriate crops. The studies also help in devising BIPM technologies that promote growing of trap or border crops to conserve natural enemies.

The searching efficacy of a parasitoid is increased by applying certain chemicals called kairomones, which are originally isolated from their host species. Phagostimulants are applied to the plants to increase the ingestion of leaves sprayed with microbial agents. The semiochemicals could attract the parasitoids of gall midge, leafhopper and other pests from wild hosts to rice. Caryophyllene, a host plant kairomone from cotton, was found to act as an attractant for chrysopids. The role of L- tryptophan as an attractant has also been proved in cotton plants. Similarly, the effectiveness of Trichogramma and Chrysoperla was increased when the kairomone extract prepared from the scales of the Helicoverpa was used in the field. The use of n-tricosane, the unsaturated hydrocarbon from the scales of different pest species, was found to increase the effectiveness of Trichogramma.

Determining the need for action: The time and period of release of natural enemy should synchronize with the availability of suitable stage of the pest. The release of trichogrammatid egg parasitoids would be more effective if the release is based on information collected through pheromone traps. By scouting (sampling of the crop at least once a week and, in cases of intense pest pressure, twice a week or more frequently), the farmers can delay actions and avoid the unwarranted and frequent use of insecticides as long as possible to give maximum opportunity to the parasitoids and predators. The presence of any combination of 3 nos./hill of spiders Lycosa pseudoinsulata, Oxyopus javanus and Tetragnatha sp. checked the population of brown planthopper, Nilaparvata lugens, and white-backed planthopper, hence requiring no other action. Similarly, if the ratio of mirid bug Cyrtorhinus lividipennis to brown planthopper reaches 1:20 or braconid parasitoid Diaeretiella rapae to mustard aphid Lipaphis erysimi reaches 1:50 or second-instar larvae of Coccinella septempunctata to mustard aphid L. erysimi reaches 1:30, no action is required. Sufficient level of parasitism (=50%) or presence of predators (20% of active stage in relation to hosts) in adequate numbers obviates the need for action. The need for action has to be

determined for each crop ecosystem, based on the population of the natural enemies and their feeding or parasitizing potential.

The beneficial interactions between parasitoid, entomofungus and predators are determined. When parasitoids are active, predators may not be released. Similarly, during mild humid climate when entomofungal pathogens are active, release of parasitoids for the same purpose may be counterproductive.

Influence of plant types: \t has been amply demonstrated in India that the egg parasitoids Trichogramma spp. avoid parasitizing their hosts on chickpea, pigeonpea and planted crop of tobacco, but are effective on sorghum, corn, cotton, and many other crops and weed hosts of the pests. The plant leaf pubescence affects searching efficiency, parasitism, oviposition and prey consumption. Glandular trichomes interfere with the activity of certain predators. Smooth leaf surface attracts parasitism, while the rough surface, particularly the leaves with hooked trichomes, may even hamper the activity of coccinellid predators.

The colour of leaf and flower bud also plays a major role in attracting or repelling parasitoids, e.g. the yellow coloured marigold, attracts more trichogrammatids than any other colour.

Varieties with more flowers, good canopy and more nectaries increase the effectiveness of the entomophages by providing shelter and food. Cotton varieties with higher trichome density were considered to be unfavourable to predators. But the higher trichome density also reduced the population of ants, which tend the colonies of aphids on cotton due to lesser aphid population, which in turn increased the effectiveness of predator, Chrysoperla sp. Apart from morphological characteristics of the host plants, the differences in profile of volatile contents between the cultivars also play an important role in the effectiveness of the predators and parasitoids.

Trap crops and intercrops: Due to differential attraction, the pest from the main crop is attracted to a trap crop, which is deliberately planted; the attracted pest on a trap crop is relatively easy to tackle in a restricted area. For example, the population of H. armigera on rustica tobacco is destroyed naturally by the mirid predator, Cyrtopeltis tenui; intercropping cotton with cowpea increases the overall parasitism of H.armigera, and predation of aphids by coccinellid beetles and predatory bugs, attracting and trapping Earias vittella on okra and destroying the fruits at 45 days after planting; planting corn as a trap crop to attract the eggs of H. armigera to corn silks and releasing Trichogramma chilonis Bio C1 or Bio C6 at 3 days interval (corn also serves as a good pollen source for chrysopids and is a favourite abode of anthocorid bugs); attracting H. armigera to lay eggs on border or bund rows of yellow marigold trap crop and releasing T. chilonis Bio C1 or Bio C6 at 3 days interval on the border trap crop, collecting egg masses of Spodoptera litura from the border trap crop of castor and keeping them in perforated or net mesh cages which permit the parasitoid to emerge but not the damaging larvae (In case Jelenomus remus is available, release @ 50/castor plant at weekly interval during the egg laying period of S. litura and spray of Spli-NPV). High mortality of leaf miner, Aproaerema modicella is observed due to the parasitoid, Goniozus sp. in groundnut and pearl millet combination.

About 60 million frogs (which are consumed as a delicacy in many countries) were

BIOLOGICAL CONTROL OF CROP PESTS

caught each year from rice fields and exported after processing. Catching frogs leads to survival of pests, and farmers have to spend more on pest-control operations. The Government of India has banned the export of frogs, as frogs get about 90% of their food from agricultural pests. Legislation is required to ban all such actions, which directly or indirectly deplete the beneficial fauna.

In this millennium, concerted efforts should be made to adopt biological control- based pest-management methods including conservation techniques for which research capabilities should be enhanced and transfer of technology strengthened. The promising biological control systems are detailed in Table 21.1.

jeolBojoig Bulsjword 1"LZ alge

(panuyuoo 4°42

snues SnUOUE]a |