SOURCE_DOCUMENT: Chapter 16.pdf

16. Soil Fertility, Fertilizers and Integrated Nutrients Use

Soil fertility refers to the inherent capacity of a soil to supply essential nutrient elements to the plants in adequate amount and in right proportion for their optimum growth. It is one of the key components to determine productivity. It is defined as the quality of a soil that enables it to provide essential chemical elements in adequate quantities and proportions for the growth of specified plants. The essential nutrient elements comprise the key components of soil fertility vis--vis plant nutrition and therefore these are referred to as plant nutrients or nutrient elements.

Plant nutrition

The living cells have the capability to take up substances from the environment and use them for the synthesis of their own cellular components or as an energy source. The chemical compounds/ions required by an organism are termed as nutrients and their supply and absorption for growth is defined as nutrition. The higher plants require solely inorganic nutrients essential for their growth and development and fundamentally differ from animals, human beings and number of micro-organisms, which also need organic foodstuffs in addition to inorganic chemical nutrients.

The following three criteria must be met to consider a nutrient element essential for the plants:

(i) A deficiency or absence of the element should make it impossible for the plant to complete its life-cycle.

(ii) The deficiency should be specific for the element in question.

(ili) The element should be directly involved in the nutrition of the plant or plays a direct role in its metabolism, e.g. as a constituent of an essential metabolite or required for the action of an enzyme system.

Essential nutrient elements

A large number of-mineral elements are present in plants, but they do not require all these. Only some of these are essential and necessary for their growth and development, whereas others are taken up either incidentally or their essential role has yet to be established. Out of the 107 elements in the Periodic Table, 90 elements naturally occur in plants, out of which only 17 are essential nutrients. However, most of the 107 elements exist in the earth’s mantle, earth’s crust or soil but the magnitude of their concentration varies. Plant being an active entity, absorbs selectively some of the elements and discriminates or rejects the other elements. Nevertheless, plant composition reflects to a large extent the composition of the soil that supports it.

In the absence of one essential nutrient element, the presence of all other essential nutrients becomes meaningless (subdued), because the plant will not be able to utilize these nutrients for its growth and development unless that one essential nutrient element is made available to plants. This also brings in focus the fundamental concept of limiting factor, and according to Justus von Libig, a German Chemist, the limiting factor-a

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 503

growth factor (viz.plant nutrient) limiting the amount of growth that can occur, can be no greater than level allowed by any growth factor (nutrient element or water supply or temperature etc.) present in the lowest amount relative to the optimum amount for that factor. For example, if the plant growth is limited by lack of potassium (K), application of nitrogen (N) and or phosphorus (P) would instead aggravate the K deficiency. Only application of K, the limiting growth factor, would help the plant to respond to the further addition of N and/or P. In that case the growth may be greater than the sum of growth result from the application of individual nutrient. This is termed positive or synergistic interaction. The concept of limiting factor is so fundamental in nature that it holds true even today.

The essential nutrient elements are carbon (C), hydrogen (H), oxygen (O), nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), potassium (K), calcium (Ca), magnesium (Mg), sulphur (S), iron (Fe), manganese (Mn), zinc (Zn), copper (Cu), boron (B), molybednum (Mo), chlorine (Cl) and nickel (Ni). These are recognized as universally essential nutrient elements, because these meet the essential requirements for diverse groups of organisms algae, bacteria, fungi and green plants. However, the list of essential nutrients may expand further as evidence of their essentiality comes into light in due course. Cobalt (Co) has been established to be essential for leguminous plants only.

Thus the knowledge of the specific role of essential elements in the growth of crop plants, their deficiency symptoms and amounts required for optimum crop production is considered necessary to understand soil fertility better, and to adopt to scientific use of fertilizers.

Plant nutrients: functions and deficiency symptoms

Plants require 17 essential nutrient elements for their normal growth and completion of life cycle. On the basis of their relative concentration or amount in plant tissues, these are divided into (i) macronutrients and (ii) micronutrients.

Macronutrients

These are required in large or macro-amounts (g/kg dry matter) by the plants and hence are termed as macronutrients. These are C, H, O, N, P, K, Ca, Mg and S. Earlier these were also known as major nutrients. Out of these, N, P and K are the primary nutrients and Ca, Mg and S the secondary nutrients. This classification is based on their relative abundance and prevalence of deficiency, and not on their relative importance in plant nutrition.

The importance of all the 17 essential nutrients lies in their specific roles or functions in various biochemical or biological systems, essential for the growth and complete development of plants. As each nutrient performs specific functions, its inadequate or deficient supply or level impairs the metabolism, growth and development of plant, and leads to the development of visual deficiency symptoms in plants.

The deficiency symptoms are generally characteristic and appear on a specific part of plant, i.e. leaves, stem and roots, depending upon its mobility and role in the plants. The deficiency symptoms are used for assessing the fertility of soils and for correcting the nutrient deficiency in question directly in the field without performing costly soil or plant analysis. Manifestation of deficiency symptoms is the first indication that inherent supply of the nutrient or nutrients from the soil is limiting the crop production,

and the soil fertility is at stake with respect to that nutrient. Further, considerable experience is required to differentiate between visual symptoms resulting from nutritional disorders and those from the attack of pests, diseases and injury caused by pollutant gases etc. Hence the specific and general functions and visual deficiency symptoms of the essential plant nutrients are described to help better understanding of the fertilizer or nutritional needs of plant vis-a-vis soil-fertility status.

Carbon, oxygen and hydrogen: Plants take up C, H, and O (about 90-95% of the plant composition) mainly from the air and water. The C and O are taken up from the atmosphere and possibly as HCO, from the soil solution. Further, oxygen is also taken up partly by plants in molecular form (O,). Hydrogen is taken up as water (HO) from the soil solution and also from atmosphere and photolysis.

Functions: C,H and O are constituents of organic materials and involved in enzymatic processes and oxidation—reduction process.

Deficiency symptoms: The deficiency of C, H and O in plants is rare because these nutrients occur in abundance in the nature. The exceptions are extreme conditions of water deficit and waterlogging, under which the uptake of H and O is severely restricted resulting in wilting due to water deficit and yellowing of lower leaves of plants because of O deficiency, which in turn also causes N deficiency and ultimately the death of plants.

Nitrogen: Plants absorb N from the soil solution as nitrate (N O,) and as ammonium (NH"*,), ¢.g. rice. These ions are released in the soil upon decomposition and mineralization of soil organic matter (SOM) and applied manures by the microorganisms or directly from the applied N-fertilizer. Legume plants fix nitrogen with the help of symbiotic microorganisms, viz. Rhizobium, Actinomyces alni, whereas non-symbiotic microorganisms, viz. Azotobacter spp. and Clostridium spp, fix N from NH", and NO, ions present in soil. The content of N in healthy plants ranges between 1 and 5% depending upon the species or variety.

Functions: Nitrogen plays an important role in plant metabolism, being an essential constituent of several metabolically active compounds. As a constituent of chlorophyll, it harnesses solar energy and fixes atmospheric CO, as carbohydrates; as amino acids (RNA and DNA), it transfers genetic information and regulates cellular metabolism of amino acids and proteins that form structural units and biological catalysts (enzymes, co-enzymes etc.) of phosphorylated compounds involved in energy transformation. It is a major structural constituent of cell and even of cell wall (5% N). Thus it increases growth and development of all living tissues and improves the protein content of food grains and quality of fodders, vegetables etc.

Deficiency symptoms: Nitrogen deficiency is observed in plants grown on soils low in organic matter (<0.4% organic C). Nearly 62% soils are deficient in N. Plants containing less than 1.0 % N are generally deficient in N. As N is translocated from older to new leaves, symptoms of its deficiency first appear on the older leaves which then advance towards upper leaves, while the new leaves remain green. A pale-yellow chlorosis develops near the tip of the leaf blade and advances towards the base in V- shape pattern along the margins until the whole blade turns yellow and then brown, followed by necrosis near the tip. The N-deficient plants are generally stunted; develop late and produce less flowers as well as shriveled grains. Excess of N produces leathery dark green succulent leaves or crop which delays maturity, adversely affect the quality

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 505

of produce and increases susceptibility to diseases and lodging. Generally, application of 120-180 kg N/ha to irrigated wheat, rice, maize, sorghum, safflower and 240 kg N/ ha to sugarcane and rapeseed-mustard in various splits, more on sandy than fine textured soils, synchronizing with peak periods of crop requirements corrects its deficiency.

Phosphorus: Soil is the main source of P for plant nutrition. Plant roots absorb P largely as dihydrogen orthophosphate ( H,PO-,)ions, and under-neutral to alkaline conditions as orthophosphate (H,PO-,) ions from the soil solution. Further, the plant also absorbs very small amounts of soluble organic phosphates, viz. nucleic acids and phytins. !

Functions: Phosphorus, like N, performs important functions as a structural component of the membrane system of the cell, the chloroplast and the mitochondrium. It is an essential constituent of nucleic acids (RNA and DNA), nucleoproteins, amino acids, proteins, phosphotides, phytin, several co-enzymes (NADP), viz. thiamine pyrophosphate and pyridoxyl phosphite, energy-rich adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and adenosine triphosphate (ATP). It is involved in energy transfer, metabolic processes and basic reactions of photosynthesis, transformation of sugars and starch, and nutrient movement in plants. It is necessary for cell division, meristematic growth, root, seed and fruit development as well as in stimulating flowering, ear emergence and maturation of crops. In leguminous crops it hastens and encourages the development of N,-fixing nodule bacteria.

Deficiency symptoms: Crops grown on acid soils, calcareous soils, coarse textured soils low in organic matter suffer from P deficiency. About 49% of Indian soils are deficient in P. In P-deficient soils the plants develop visual deficiency symptoms, viz. they fail to make a quick start, develop poor root-system, remain stunted; being mobile nutrient in plants, it is easily translocated from older tissues or leaves to the meristematic or new leaves and hence the older leaves develop characteristic symptoms of dark to blue-green colouration starting from the tips towards the base, which later turn reddish brown. Under severe deficiency the plants develop spindly growth, reddish purple in the nodes and internodes due to increase in sugar content and show formation of anthocyanin. However, the deficiency of P is not so easily recognized as that of N. The content of P in normal plants usually ranges between 0.1 and 0.4% and concentration below this causes its deficiency depending upon the crop and variety. Phosphorus need (kg P,O,/ha) of crops to produce optimum yield on low or deficient soils is generally 50-60 for wheat, 30-40 for each crop in rice-wheat system, 20-40 for sunflower, safflower, and linseed. It should preferably be applied at sowing.

Potassium: Plants absorb potassium as K* ion in larger amounts from the soil than any other nutrient (except N and Ca), Plants can store K in larger quantities than what is needed for optimum growth without causing toxicity which is termed as luxury consumption.

Functions: Potassium is involved in regulating the opening and closing of the stomata (which are essential for photosynthesis), water and nutrient (NO, PO,*, Ca”, Mg” and amino acids) transport and cooling of plants. It stabilizes the emulsions of colloidal particles that keep the protoplasm hydrated and cellular membrane permeable, and thus maintains cellular organization. It activates a number of enzymes, which catalyze the incorporation of amino acids in proteins, synthesis of peptide bonds and phosphate group transfer. Potassium helps in maintaining cytoplasmic pH to 7 and 8,

ideal for many enzyme reactions; it activates nearly 60 enzymes by exposing their active reaction sites, viz. protein-forming nitrate reductase, starch synthesizer, the starch-synthetase. Potassium reduces lodging and imparts disease resistance to crops, improves the size of grains of cereals, the quality of tobacco, flowers, and the size and shelf-life of fruits and vegetables. Though direct role of K in major metabolic processes is not known, its deficiency results in decreased level of photosynthesis in several plant species. It plays an essential role in the formation of starch and in translocation of sugars. Therefore it is of special significance to carbohydrate-rich crops, e.g. sugarcane, potato, sugarbeet etc. It increases root growth, and thereby improves tolerance of plants to stress of moisture or drought, heat, diseases and lodging.

Deficiency symptoms: Potassium deficiency is noticed in plants growing in soils inherently low in total or non-exchangeable K or on coarse textured leached soils or soils under intensive cultivation with N and P fertilizers alone. Potassium is deficient in 20% soils of India. Healthy plant tissues generally contain 1 to 5% K, almost equal to that of N. Potassium is hightly mobile in plants and its deficiency causes its translocation from older to new tissues or leaves, thereby resulting in characteristic visual symptoms on older leaves. The symptoms of chlorosis start from the leaf margins, followed by scorching and browning of tips and margins in potato, wheat, oat, barley and maize. The older leaves of rice and cotton develop yellowish-orange to yellowish- brown colour, followed by necrotic spots on the leaf blade. Overall the K-deficient plants are stunted in growth with pronounced shortening of internodes, and they develop shriveled seeds and fruits. Generally, the plant containing less than 1.0 % K is deficient. Application of 30-40 kg K,O/ha as basal dressing for irrigated rice, wheat, maize or other cereal crops and higher doses for high K requirement crops like potato, tomato, cotton, banana, grapes, etc. alleviate its deficiency. Its split application is more beneficial to sugarcane, banana, grape and rice on coarse-textured soils.

Calcium: Plant roots absorb calcium as Ca” ions and its content in healthy plants ranges from 0.2 to 1.0%.

Functions: In plants Ca forms Ca-pectate, which is an essential constituent of cell wall that maintains the integrity of membranes; and in seeds it is present as Ca~phytate. It is involved in cell division (mitosis) as well as in maintaining chromosome structure. Calcium regulates the growth of meristems and functioning of the root tips and protects the root cells against the ion imbalance, low pH and toxic effect of Al, Fe etc. It also regulates the activities of several important enzymes: phospholipase, arginine kinase, amylase and ATPase. It counteracts the injurious effects of acidic molecules of phosphoric, citric, malic and oxalic acids on plant growth by neutralizing their charges.

Deficiency symptoms: In most of the soils, plant available Ca is present in ample amounts and its deficiency is not common. But in acid soils because of its leaching losses and in alkali or sodic soils due to excess Na, the deficiency constraints of Ca are encountered. Healthy plants generally contain more than 0.1% Ca. As calcium is immobile in the plant, under its deficient supply from soil, its translocation from older to the new leaves is restricted, and hence typical visual deficiency symptoms appear on the younger leaves. Plant growth is retarded and younger leaves are short, distorted or torn. Under severe deficiency, the apical meristem dies resulting in the production of tillers from the basal nodes and development of deficiency symptoms on the emerging new leaves, In cereals or coarse grain crops the upper internodes are very small and

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 507

the leaves get crowded to give the appearance of a rosette (rose like). The young leaves of the primary shoot fail to unroll from the whirl or bend down and break off, or joined together at their tips and form ladder shape. Also the root system is stunted, flowering and maturity is delayed or even barren ears or heads develop. The Ca- deficiency syndromes in apples are bitter pit, and in tomatoes blossom end rots. Lime application to acid soils and gypsum to alkali or sodic soils correct Ca deficiency.

Magnesium: Plant roots absorb magnesium as Mg** ion and its content in Mg- adequate plants ranges from 0.1 to 0.4% below which the deficiency may occur.

Functions: It is an essential constituent of the chlorophyll as Mg-porphyrin: one atom of Mg bound to 4 rings of pyrrole. Hence it is indispensable in the reaction of photosynthesis (6CO, + 6H,O>C sH,,0, + 60,), mediated by or through chlorophyll, sunlight and phosphate energy. It regulates the activity of several enzyme systems involved in synthesis of nucleic acids and metabolism of carbohydrates. A large part of magnesium is associated with organic anions, viz. malate, and it also helps in the movement of sugars and translocation of P in plants.

Deficiency symptoms: Magnesium deficiency is also observed in plants growing in acid soils, leached soils and sandy soils. The Mg-sufficient plants generally contain more than 0.1% Mg, below which its deficiency may result. Mg-deficient plants usually lack vigour and are stunted. As Mg is a mobile nutrient in plants, its deficiency symptoms manifest first on the older leaves and advances upwards to younger leaves as interveinal chlorosis, followed by development of purple lesions within the chlorotic tissues. As deficiency proceeds, the veins also become chlorotic and the leaves develop almost uniform pale colour and the purple lesion turn brown, orange or red: ultimately the tissues dry up and may die. Cattle grazing on Mg-deficient pastures suffer from grass tetany, the nutritional disorder of Mg.

Sulphur: Plants absorb sulphur largely as SO,” ion, and as SO, by the foliage. The concentration of S in healthy plants ranges from 0.1 to 0.4%,almost equal to that of P and Mg.

Functions: It is an essential constituent of the sulphur-containing amino acids, viz. cysteine, cystine and methionine. It is also a constituent of ferrodoxin-containing nitrogenase enzyme, which is involved in biological N-fixation (BNF) and electron transfer reactions and in the metabolic activities of vitamins, biotin, thiamine, coenzyme A synthesis of glucosides in mustard oil, and in increasing the oil quality of oilseed crops.

Deficiency symptoms: Generally crops grown on coarse textured soils under intensive cultivation suffer from its deficiency, especially fertilized with high analysis fertilizer free from S and/or irrigated with tube-well and canal water low in S or in rainfed areas. Soils low in organic matter and coarse textured or leached acid soils are deficient in S. As sulphur is immobile in the plants, its deficiency first shows up on the younger leaves as uniform pale green followed by their chlorosis. Depending upon the crop and variety, plants having less than 0.1 to 0.2% S content suffer from its deficiency. But in most of the crop species its critical limit is 0.20 to 0.25% , below which crops respond to its application. Crop plants having more than 16:1 N:S ratio can be suspected to be deficient in sulphur. Oilseeds, pulses and other crops having high requirement of S suffer most from its deficiency. Even cereal crops like wheat and rice respond to its application on such soils. Application of 20-60 kg S/ha corrected

its deficiency in most of these soils/crops.

Micronutrients

These are required in small or micro-amount (< 500 mg/kg dry matter except Fe and Mn) and hence are termed micronutrients. These are as essential and important like macronutrients, and include Fe, Mn, Zn, Cu, B, Mo, Cl and Ni. These are subdivided into micronutrient cations (Fe, Mn, Zn, Cu, Ni) and micronutrient anions (B, Mo and CI) depending upon the form in which they are absorbed by the plant.

Tron: Iron (Fe) exhibits Fe (II) and Fe (III) oxidation states in plants, and is taken up in the form of Fe”* ion. Its concentration in normal plants ranges between 100 and 500 mg/kg.

Functions: It is a constituent of haeme and non-haeme proteins. The haeme protein contains Fe-porphyrin complex molecule, a prosthetic group of cytochrome, haematin, ferrichrome, oxidase, catalase, peroxidase, and leg-haemoglobin enzymes. These are involved in redox reactions in respiration and photosynthesis. The non-haeme contains stable Fe-S protein, the ferrodoxin, which is the first stable redox compound of photosynthetic electron transport chain. It is necessary for the synthesis and maintenance of chlorophyll in plants and plays an important role in nucleic acid synthesis. Iron activates a number of enzymes, including nitrogenase, aminolevolinic acid synthetase and copro-porphyrinogen oxidase. ‘

Deficiency symptoms: Iron deficiency is observed in plants growing on calcareous high pH soils, compact soils with restricted aeration, and sandy soils low in organic matter content. Iron is immobile in plants. The iron deficiency shows first on younger leaves as pale yellow interveinal chlorosis of the tissues whereas the veins remain green. With the severity of deficiency the veins also turn pale-yellow and the chlorotic tissues develop white necrotic areas, which form brown lesions or pale-red streaks in some species, e.g. surgarcane, sorghum etc. Generally the plants containing less than 50 mg Fe”*/kg dry matter are categorized deficient in iron. It is the Fe** fraction (active Fe) that resolves better the Fe deficiency in plants.

Correction of micronutrients in soils and crops are given under the title— “Micronutrient Fertilizers and General Recommendations” (see p. 545 onwards).

Manganese: Plant absorbs Mn as Mn, but it is easily oxidized to Mn** and Mn** forms.

Functions: It is a constituent of water splitting enzyme associated with O, evolution and electron transfer in photosystem II of photosynthesis. It influences auxin levels and maintains chloroplast membrane structure. Being a constituent of superoxide dismutase, it detoxifies or protects cells against the ill effects of superoxide-free radicals.

Deficiency symptoms: Manganese deficiency is observed on plants grown in calcareous soils, leached sandy soils low in organic matter, in upland crops (wheat, berseem etc.) grown in rotation with rice on sandy soils of Punjab. Plant containing 15 to 25 mg Mn/kg, depending upon the crop or variety, are usually categorized as deficient in Mn. However, its concentration in normal plants may vary from 25 to 500 mg/kg. Mn deficiency symptoms develop as interveinal chlorosis on the middle and older leaves because of its translocation to younger leaves. The symptoms first appear as very light grey, greyish-yellow or greyish-brown specks of minute size in the interveinal area at the basal part of the leaf, which later extend towards the tip. Under

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 509

severe deficiency, these specks enlarge and coalesce to form spots, streaks, speckles or bands of pinkish-brown or buff colour between the veins that remain green; ultimately the affected areas form necrotic lesions, turn red, reddish-brown or brown. Plants become stunted and develop weak and restricted root system, leading to poor crop growth and economic yield. These syndromes of Mn deficiency are commonly known as grey speck of oats, pahala blight of sugarcane, speckled yellow of sugarbeet, marsh spot of peas etc.

Zinc: Plants absorb Zn as Zn?" and occurs only as Zn (II) oxidation state.

as and occurs only as Zn (II) oxidation state. Functions: Zinc is a constituent of carbonic anhydrase, alcoholic dehydrogenase, superoxide dismutase, lactate dehydrogenase, aldolase, phosphatase, DNA-RNA polymerase etc. The carbonic anhydrase is localized in the cytoplasm and chloroplast. It causes reversible hydration of CO, to form HCO;, (H,O + CO, = H* + HCO*,) for transport and utilization of CO, in photosynthesis and resists pH changes in cytoplasm. Alcohol dehydrogenase plays an important role in anaerobic respiration of roots and catalyses the reduction of acetaldehyde to ethanol. The superoxide dismutase (Zn-Cu) detoxifies super-oxide free radicals and protects the proteins and lipids against oxidation. Zinc is also involved in the synthesis of RNA, IAA, and metabolism of gibberellic acid. Zinc forms preferential bond with SH group and play a role in stabilization and structural orientation of protein membrane.

Deficiency symptoms: Zinc deficiency is observed in crops growing in intensively cultivated soils, which are coarse in texture; high in pH (sodic), high in CaCO, (calcareous) or low in organic matter or waterlogged/submerged rice soils. The plants usually contain 20 to 150 mg Zn/kg. The critical level of its deficiency ranges between 15 and 20 mg/kg depending upon the crop and varieties. Zinc is not readily translocated from older to younger leaves, therefore during the period of Zn shortage, its deficiency symptoms usually appear on the new foliage. In general, the visual symptoms in most of the crop plants develop in the second or third fully mature young leaves. A white to pale yellow chlorosis develops between the green mid-vein and margin at the base of the leaf and extends towards the tip, popularly known as white bud in maize or sorghum. The white bud is not a bud but rather a band or patch of white tissues. As the deficiency becomes severe, the tissue develops brown necrosis and purple pigmentations. Internodes and leaves become very short (little leaf) and develop a close cluster to give a rosette (rose like) appearance, causing-stunted plant growth, delay in ear and tassel formation and maturity of plant. In rice the symptoms appear on Telatively older leaves as small scattered light pale-yellow spots that later enlarge, coalesce, and turn deep brown, e:g. iron rust or coppery brownish, and popularly known as khaira disease in India, and hadda disease in Pakistan, akgara type II in Japan, taya-taya or apaya- pula in Philippines. In citrus Zn deficiency is known as mottle leaf (little leaf) or frenching.

Copper: \t exists in plant as cuprous Cu(I) and cupric(II) oxidation states and is taken by plants as Cu".

Functions: It is constituent of several proteins or enzymes that perform important biochemical functions, viz. (i) superoxide dismutase (Cu-Zn SOD) that detoxifies superoxide free radicals (O-,) formed in many redox reactions, and controls peroxidation of lipids and hence the senescence, (ii) plastocyanin which is the main component of the electron transport protein of photosystem I, (iii) ascorbate oxidase

that catalyzes the oxidation of ascorbic acid to dehydroascorbic acid, (iv) polyphenol oxidase that catalyzes the oxidation of phenolics as precursors of lignin, and (v) diamine oxidase that provides the H,O, required for oxidation by peroxidases in lignification of cell walls.

Deficiency symptoms: Copper deficiency is generally observed in crops growing on soils of either inherently low in total Cu or soils high in organic matter (peat soils). The plants contain concentration ranging between 5 and 20 mg/kg. The copper is immobile in plants; its deficiency symptoms appear on the young mature leaf and even on the emerging one. Under mild-Cu deficiency, plants are stunted and foliage turns pale green with interveinal pale yellow chlorosis at the base of the blade. In cereals, Cu deficiency condition is popularly known as white tip or reclamation disease, as observed during the reclamation of peat soils. Cu deficiency causes senescence, male sterility, delay in flowering and loss of grain yield. In citrus, dieback of new growth results in development of gum pockets between the bark and the wood, commonly known as exanthema.

Boron: Plants absorb boron as H,BO, and under high pH conditions also as H,BO,,. Functions: It plays many important roles in the plants, viz. (i) transport of sugars, (ii) synthesis of cell wall and its structure, (iii) lignification, (iv) metabolism of phenols, carbohydrates, IAA, RNA, (v) transport of sugars, (vi) pollen germination and the growth of pollen tube, (vii) regulates opening of stomata, and (viii) imparts drought resistance to crops.

Deficiency symptoms: Boron deficiency in crops is more critical in highly calcareous soils, sandy leached soils, limed acid soils or reclaimed yellow or lateritic soils. Generally, B-sufficient plants contain 10 to 200 mg B/kg dry matter. Its critical limit ranges between 20 and 70 mg/kg in dicotyledonous and 5 to 10 mg/kg in graminaceous plants. Boron is immobile in plants, and hence its deficiency symptoms develop on new tissues or young leaves as white or transparent lesions in the interveinal mid- areas of the leaf. With the severity of its deficiency, the lesions join together and extend beyond the mid-section while the veins remain green. Under acute deficiency the leaves become thick, curl become quite brittle, the internodes become short and shoot tips die resulting in the growth of lateral shoots, the tips of which also die, and the plants or trees form bushy appearance. In addition, plants develop poor root growth, defective inflorescence and no flower formation. The deficiency syndromes are popularly known as brown heart or heart rot in sugarbeet and turnip, browning of curds and hollow stem in cauliflower and external and internal cork in apples.

Molybdenum: Plants take up Mo as MoO,.. In plants it exists as Mo (VI) under oxidative conditions and undergoes reduction to Mo (V) and Mo (IV) forms and thus performs biochemical role in plants.

Functions: Mo is an essential constituent of many enzymes: nitrogenase that catalyzes biological nitrogen-fixation (BNF) by root-nodule bacteria of legume plants, nitrate reductase (NR) reduces nitrate to nitrite and xanthine oxidase/dehydrogenase which catalyzes the catabolic pathway of purines to uric acid.

Deficiency symptoms: Molybdenum deficiency is observed in plants growing in acid soils. Mo-deficient plants usually contain less than 0.2 mg Mo/kg and the sufficient ones 0.2 to 2 mg Mo/kg. Its deficiency symptoms appear on old or middle leaves as interveinal chlorotic mottling, followed by marginal necrosis and in-folding of leaves.

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 511

Under severe deficiency, mottled area becomes necrotic, causing leaf tissues wither from margins towards the lamina and midrib leaving only the midrib, and a few small pieces of leaf blade, which give the appearance of whip or tail commonly known as whip-tail in cauliflower and broccoli.

Chlorine: Plants absorb chlorine as Cl both through roots and foliage. Normal plants generally contain 100 to 500 mg Cl/kg. Because of its abundance in nature, its deficiency is noticed only in areas far from the sea where atmospheric deposition does not supply enough Cl, e.g. Great Plains Mid-west of the USA. Also its deficiency results in tropical areas, where excessive rainfall leaches Cl from the soil profile.

Functions: It is a constituent of chlorine-containing auxin chloroindolyl-c-acetic acid and of many compounds found in fungi and bacteria. It regulates water potential of plant through osmotic adjustment, viz. stomata opening, cell elongation, turgour pressure, water potential of plants and osmotic pressure. It acts as a co-factor in water- splitting Mn-enzymes. Chlorine provides resistance to plants against several diseases.

Deficiency symptoms: Deficient winter wheat tissues contain less than 0.1% Cl and soil less than 11 kg Cl/ha at 0-60 cm soil depth. The symptoms appear as irregular yellow to necrotic spotting of leaves, premature wilting, chlorosis of newly emerging leaves, and reduced shoot and root growth.

Nickel: Plants absorb it as Ni?*. Normal plants contain 0.1 to 10 mg Ni/kg. Functions: It is essential for hydrogenase, methyl reductase and urease activities that regulate N metabolism. It is needed for grain filling and seed vitality.

Deficiency symptoms: Visual deficiency symptoms of Ni have not yet been defined adequately. Its deficiency causes accumulation of nitrates and decrease in amino acid content in barley, containing less than 0.1 mg Ni/kg.

Soil-plant system and plant nutrition

Soil is a multiple-phase system that consists of solids, liquids and gases in about 50 : 25 : 25. The inorganic solid part is composed of primary and secondary mineral particles at different stages of weathering and of different sizes. The organic solids are made up of plant and animal residues at all stages of decomposition, humus being the stable fraction; and also includes the living phase of bacteria, actinomycetes, fungi, algae, protozoa, nematodes, and other forms of life, which are continually degrading organic residues in the soil and re-synthesizing some of the constituents.

The soil particles of less than 20 jum size, include a portion of silt, clay fraction (<2 pm) and colloidal organic matter, possess electrical charges and act as a seat of ion exchange. The positively charged ion are called cations and the negatively charged as anions. The ion exchange process that involves cations is termed cation exchange and the one that involves anions the anion exchange. These processes mainly control the supply of plant nutrients in soils and thus are regarded important next to the photosynthesis process of plant nutrition.

The plant nutrients occur in the solid phase and their normal pathway to the plant system is through the surrounding liquid phase, the soil solution, and then to the plant roots and plant cells (Fig. 16.1). The soil solution constitutes the liquid phase that surrounds the soil particles and the plant roots. There it forms the central key point from which the plants absorb their nutrient elements. The absorption of nutrient ions from the soil solution causes desorption of the adsorbed nutrient ions from the soil

exchange sites or complex. At the same time weathering or dissolution of soil minerals—crystalline and amorphous—influences the concentration and composition of soil solution as well as of exchange complex. If the soil solution becomes supersaturated with respect to any mineral element that mineral element may precipitate, and if it becomes under-saturated that mineral may start dissolving. The living organisms, e.g. plants, remove nutrients from the soil solution for their body tissues. But on decomposition of organic matter, including the dead organisms, it releases the nutrients into the soil solution. This equilibrium depends on the metabolic energy relationship of microorganisms. Though the soil solution is influenced by all the reactions that occur in soils, the solubility of various minerals mainly controls its composition.

At a given point of time the available plant nutrients in the soil solution may range from a tiny amount to larger quantities. Under favourable conditions, plants in general require larger amounts of nutrients when compared with the quantity available in the soil solution, then the situation of nutrient supply rate to plants becomes a limiting factor, especially at the critical stages of plant growth, thereby cause their deficient levels in plant that leads to low crop yields. Adequate addition of nutrients through the use of suitable fertilizers and manures are recommended for attaining sustainable higher crop yield in productive farming.

The operation of this system depends on the solar energy through photosynthesis and metabolic activities. This is however, an oversimplified statement for gaining a physical concept of the natural phenomenon, but there are physico-chemical as well as physiological processes that influence the reactions in the pathway. The actual transfer in nature takes place through the charged ions, the usual form in which plant- food elements occur in the soil solution. Plant roots take up nutrient elements from the soil in these ionic forms.

The knowledge of how the nutrient ions move to the plant roots or vice-versa and the mechanism of their absorption by plants is necessary.

Nutrient movement in soil to plant roots: Either the nutrients ions in soil solution move to the plant roots or the roots move to the nutrients on the soil phase before their

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 513

absorption or uptake. However, the movement of nutrient elements to plant roots and their absorption mechanisms in crop plants are fairly well known; there are three mechanisms of nutrient movement in the soil-plant system, viz. (/) the contact exchange and root interception, (ii) mass flow or convection, and (iii) diffusion.

Contact exchange and root interception: The plant roots come into direct contact with the soil solids and the exchangeable nutrient ions from the clay-humus colloids migrate directly to the root surface, e.g. soil carries a negative charge and exhibits cation-exchange property. Nutrient absorption through this mechanism is however insignificant, because most of the plant nutrients occur in the soil solution. Plant roots actually grow to come into contact with only 3% of the soil volume, exploited by the root mass, and the nutrient uptake through root interception is still less.

Mass flow: The mass flow or convection is the most important mechanism of nutrient movement in the soil. The nutrients move physically with the flow of soil water towards plant root, because continuous absorption of water due to transpiration creates a hydraulic gradient at the root surface, where their absorption through the roots takes place along with the water. Some nutrient ions that move freely with water, generally for large distances, are called mobile nutrients. However, others move slowly with water for relatively small distances, only a few millimetres, called immobile nutrients. Nutrients ions viz. nitrate, chloride and sulphate are weakly adsorbed by the soil colloids and remain mainly in the soil solution. Roots absorb these nutrients along with the soil water. The nutrient uptake through this mechanism is directly related to transpiration—the amount of water used by the plants. Mass flow is responsible for supplying the root with much of the plant needs for N, S, Cl, Ca and Mg when present in sufficient concentrations in the soil solution, but not for relatively immobile nutrient elements, e.g. P, K, Zn, Fe, Mn, B etc.

Diffusion: When nutrient ions in the soil solution or soil medium move from a point of higher concentration to a point of lower concentration, it is called diffusion; the mechanism enables movement of the nutrient ion without the movement of water. Depending upon the requirement of plants for water, the nutrients in soil solution surrounding the roots may either deplete or accumulate, thus creating a concentration gradient of nutrients in soil solution, which causes flow of nutrients in either direction through the soil solution towards or away from the root surface. The amount of nutrient movement in this case depends on the ion-concentration gradient and transport pathways, which in turn are highly influenced by the content of soil water and physico- chemical properties of the soils. This mechanism is predominant in supplying most of the relatively immobile nutrient elements, e.g. P, K, Zn, Cu, Fe, Mn, B, Mo and Ni, to plant roots. The rhizosphere volume of soil in the immediate neighbourhood of the effective plant root receives plant nutrients continuously to be delivered to the roots by diffusion. However, when the nutrient concentration builds up in far excess of the plant needs, the diffusion may take place in the reverse direction. These are some of the more important basic facts that help one to make a correct choice of fertilizers and fertilizer practices for adopting scientific agriculture.

Nutrient uptake or absorption: Plants absorb nutrient ions in amounts according to their needs, except K, Cl, and the soil’s ability to supply these. Usually, uptake of nutrients increases curvilinear with increase in its concentration in soil solution at the root surface, But there is a minimum concentration of nutrient ions in soil solution,

below which plant roots are unable to take up that nutrient ion. The process of nutrient absorption or uptake by plants thus refers to the transfer of the nutrient ions across the soil root interfaces into the plant cell. The energy for the process is provided by the metabolic activity of the plant. The most efficient absorption of plant nutrients takes place in the younger tissues of the roots, which are capable of growth and elongation. As the root systems vary from crop to crop, so does their feeding power also. The extent and spread of the effective root system determines the soil volume tapped in the feeding-zone of the crop plant. This is indeed an important information in a given soil-plant system, which helps us choose fertilizers and fertilizer-use practices.

The uptake of nutrient ions in the plant cell may occur either with or without the participation of the metabolic energy, and occur through active and passive mechanisms or processes. Plant-root membranes usually have —120 to -18 mV electrical potential difference and are able to hold higher concentration of cations in the cytoplasm compared with the outside concentration, whereas the anions cannot be held inside the cytoplasm in high concentration, at the expense of the metabolic energy; it is called active uptake or absorption. Thus the uptake of ions occurs against the electro- chemical potential gradient by expenditure of metabolic energy.

The uptake of nutrient ions that occur in the direction of concentration gradient, from high to low till equilibrium is reached, with or without involvement of metabolic energy is known as “passive uptake”. If metabolic energy is involved in the passive process, the process is known as “facilitated diffusion”. At normal concentration, the cations are absorbed in response to the electro-chemical potential gradient, whereas pumping of anions inside the membrane occurs against the existing electro-chemical potential gradient. Passive uptake occurs as a direct diffusion through lipid phase of the membrane or carrier-mediated diffusion or through aqueous pores in the membrane, and the driving force for the transport of nutrient ions is the electro- chemical potential. Plant cells are negatively charged, and therefore cations will accumulate next to the electrical potential without the expense of the metabolic energy. “Active uptake” of anions is also expected into cytoplasm through co-transport or sym-port.

Fertility status and assessment

Soil fertility status can be assessed from visual symptoms of nutrient deficiency in plants as well as from plant analysis, soil analysis or soil test.

The tool of identifying visual deficiency symptoms suffers from the drawback that the visual nutrient-deficiency symptoms appear only at advanced or severe stage, and by that time considerable yield loss has already occurred to take effective control measures. However, development of deficiency symptoms is the first indication that inherent supply of the nutrient from soil is limiting the crop production and the soil fertility is low for that nutrient. Further, considerable experience is required to differentiate between visual symptoms resulting from nutritional disorders and those arising from the attack of pests, diseases and injury caused by excess salt or salinity, pollutant gases etc. The concentration of nutrient element in plant is related to plant growth, and if the concentration is limiting the plant growth, it is termed the critical level of deficiency and addition of that nutrient or limiting growth factor will increase the growth and the yield of crop. The plant analysis for field crops also suffers from

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 515

the drawback that these are performed when considerable damage to the crop has already occurred. Nevertheless, these two tools do help in knowing the fertility status of the soil and working out of the fertilizer or nutritional needs of crops in conjunction with soil analysis.

Soil analysis or soil testing: Soil analysis is a useful tool to know in advance the fertility status of the soil with respect to the essential plant nutrients limiting the crop growth. It can be done before sowing the crops to correct the deficiency with the use of appropriate nutrients from fertilizers and manures. In soil testing, the nutrient element is extracted from the soil with different extraction solutions, viz. ammonium or sodium acetate buffered salt solutions, dilute acids and chelating agents which simulate closely the extraction or absorption power of the plant roots for the nutrients. Soil test values are correlated with percent response of crops to the applied nutrients under field or pot conditions. The critical levels of deficiency, moderate or marginal deficiency and adequacy of the nutrients are worked out. Since long the soil tests have been used to estimate the need for essential plant-nutrient fertilization.

The main objectives of soil test are given below.

1. Generally for grouping of soils into classes of low, medium and high fertility and more specifically for site specific nutrient management (SSNM) for the purposes of fertilization, as well as amending the problem acid soils with lime and alkali soils with gypsum or other suitable amendments.

2. Prediction of the probability of getting a profitable response to fertilizer nutrients and amendment application.

3. Evaluation of soil fertility status vis-a-vis soil productivity, i.e. to help monitor soil fertility, yield sustainability and nutritional quality of crops for human and animal health over time.

4. Determination of specific soil conditions (sodicity, acidity, toxicity from Se, AS, Cd, Pb etc) that may be improved through addition of soil amendments or cultural practices.

One of the main purpose of soil test is to separate the responsive or deficient soils from the non-responsive or non-deficient ones for essential nutrients(s). Corrective measures are taken once the deficient soils are identified with the use of specific fertilizer-nutrient and/or organic manures for optimum and/or maximum economic crop production as well as adequate nutrition of animals and human beings. Based on the soil tests fertility status maps are produced, which help fertilizer manufacturer and policy planner in estimating the amounts and kinds of fertilizer to be produced and supplied to the specific needed region to help in maintaining optimum agricultural production as well as soil fertility. These objectives thus point out the need for identifying or developing appropriate soil test methods for determining the available plant nutrients. The interpretation of the soil test is based on the calibration done with crop response to the added nutrient in adequate amount when other essential nutrients and conditions are not limiting.

Soil test and fertilizer recommendation: Soil testing and plant analysis are useful tools for framing recommendations for the application of fertilizer to the crops. Soil testing gives a measure of the availability of nutrients to crops, whereas plant analysis indicates the actual removal of the nutrients from the soil.

Soil test methods and their calibration: A soil test method should be rapid, cheap

and should extract in proportion to the amount of nutrients extracted by a crop. It should preferably be universal in nature. The degree of regression of crop responses (in terms of dry matter or economic yield) to the added fertilizers nutrients and the soil test value with a particular method assesses whether a soil test method extracts the nutrients in proportion of the amount extracted by the crop. The value of soil test method that gives a very high degree of regression is calibrated with a crop response.

The various steps followed in this calibration study are collection of representative or selected soil samples, analysis of soils using different extractants vis-a-vis solutions comprising inorganic and/or organic salts (soil-test methods) for available nutrients, selecting soils with wide range in available nutrients, conducting potted-plant studies with graded doses of added nutrients in question while all other essential nutrients are supplied to meet the crop requirement, and computing the percentage yield responses, i.e. the yields of the control as percentage of the maximum yield.

The correlation of soil-test values of each method with percentage yields or nutrient uptake is made. The method that gives the highest coefficient of correlation is categorized as the best or most efficient method. The critical values of the nutrient element for deficiency (highly responsive), moderate deficiency (moderately responsive), no deficiency or adequacy (non-responsive) or into categories of low, medium and high available nutrient level as measured by the efficient method are determined. For this purpose, a graph is prepared where the soil-test values are plotted on the X-axis and the corresponding responses to applied nutrient on the Y-axis either as a point or a bar. A careful look at the scatter diagram or the histograms will show a clear separation of the highly responsive soils from the moderately responsive and non-responsive soils. Also simple graphical or statistical approach of Cate and Nelson, 1971 (Soil Science Society America Proceedings 35: 658-660) can be used for determining the critical values for different categories of deficiency or available nutrient status in soils.

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 517

The soil-test methods that proved efficient in measuring the available nutrients, adopted by most of the soil testing laboratories in the country, their rating are given in Table 16.1.

Fertility status of Indian soils

Assessment of fertility vis-a-vis nutrient status of soils has been made by developing or standardizing soil test methods and soil test rating chart (Table 16.1). About 686 soil-testing laboratories (STL) with annual analyzing capacity of 7.21 million soil samples, run by the State Govt. (647 STL), fertilizer industries (39 STL), in addition to State Agricultural Universities and ICAR Institutes (about 20 STL) assess the nutrient status of soils. Based on soil test data these laboratories do publish from time to time the soil fertility status maps. Nitrogen is low in about 62% and medium in 37% of the tested soils, and spectacular responses of almost all the crops to fertilizer N application have been recorded. Analysis of more than 9.6 million soil samples from 363 districts indicated that 49% and 47% samples, respectively, are low and medium in P. Potassium was low in 20% and medium in 42% districts. Analysis of more than 252,000 soil samples of the country revealed widespread deficiency of Zn in about 50% of samples.

The extent of Zn deficiency ranged between 24 and 86% in different states, being 84% in Maharashtra, 73% in Karnataka, 61% in Haryana, 58% in Tamil Nadu, 57% in Meghalaya, 54% in Bihar and Orissa, 49 % in Andhra Pradesh, 48% in Punjab, 46% in Uttar Pradesh, 44% in Madhya Pradesh, 42% in Himachal Pradesh, 36% in West Bengal, 34% in Asom and Kerala and 24% in Gujarat. Almost all the soils testing more than 9.0 pH or sodic soils were deficient in Zn.

The deficiencies of Fe, Mn, Cu, and B were noticed in 13, 4, 2 and 35% of tested soil samples respectively. The deficiency of Fe was 35, 27, 23, 20, 17,and 14% in Karnataka, HP, Maharashtra, Haryana, TN and Punjab, respectively, and less than 8% in other states. Iron deficiency was also recorded in rice, sugarcane, sorghum, groundnut and chickpea grown in coarse-textured alluvial, black clay and red soils.

The deficiency of Cu and Mn was less than 6% except 31% Cu in Kerala and 17% of Mn in Karnataka. But Mn deficiency is very high and a perpetual problem in sandy soils under rice-wheat cropping system for more than 6-8 years in Punjab due to leaching and its large removal by crops. Its deficiency is now a serious constraint to high productivity of wheat. And nearly 25 to 30% of such soils are deficient in Mn. Boron deficiency is wide spread in 37 to 65% of tested soil samples of red and lateritic soils of West Bengal, Orissa, and Maharashtra; and of highly calcareous soils of Bihar, Gujarat (Kutch) and Uttar Pradesh (Takkar, 1996. Journal of Indian Society Soil Science; Singh, 2009. Indian Journal of Fertilizer).

The extent of S deficiency in about 4,800 tested soil samples of the country indicated S deficiency in 48% soils with a range of 11 to 78% in different states. The deficiency was observed in 250 districts of the country. More recent studies under the TSI-FDCO and TSI-FAI-IFA also established S deficiency both based on soil test and crop responses to S in more than 40% of soils in 45% districts and 20-40% soils in 40% of districts and less than 20% soils in rest of the districts. The GOI has recognized S as macronutrient along with NPK and from May 2008 it is being subsidized in complex fertilizers as well as in concession scheme 2008-09 for ammonium sulphate and SSP. Maintenance of soil fertility and fertilizer use: Once the status of soil fertility is

known through the tools of visual deficiency symptoms, plant analysis or soil testing, it can be maintained through specific and optimum use of fertilizers and or organic manures to restore the lost fertility nutrient status for optimum soil productivity. It emphasizes that the capacity of a soil to produce crops should be expressed in terms of yield. Fertilizer requirement is the quantity of some plant nutrients needed, in addition to the amount supplied by the soil, to increase the plant growth to a designated optimum. Fertilizer refers to any organic and inorganic material of natural or synthetic origin added to the soil to supply some nutrient elements essential to the growth of plants.

Nanotechnology in soil fertility, fertilizer and plant nutrition

Nanotechnology is defined as the understanding and control of matter at dimensions of 1-100 nm where unique physical properties make novel applications possible (EPA, 2007). Soils contain matter of dimensions of 1—-1,000 nm, the colloids, viz. inorganic, organic humic substances and large biopolymer (polysaccharides) of nanoparticles (NPs) size. The NPs have extremely high specific surface areas for their volume as well as high proportion of atoms at their surface than other particles. Weathering of silicates, oxides and other minerals produce number of NPs in soil such as amorphous silica, hydrous aluminosilicates (allophane, clays like hallosites) and oxides (magnetite, hematite etc.) and sulphides (FeS, ZnS etc) but their precise functions and effects are still poorly defined and understood.

Nano-enhanced products like nano-fertilizers with nano-based smart delivery systems (like halloysites) are available in advanced countries to provide nutrients at desired site, time and rate to enhance nutrient or fertilizer-use efficiency and productivity. Some studies have shown the importance of nanoparticles in increasing bio-availability of nutrient elements and transport of pollutants in soils. Synthesized NPs like amphiphilic polyurethane, zerovalent iron (nZVI) and nano-sized zeolite are used for reclaiming heavy metal and other polluted soils.

Recent studies show that inorganic NPs of ZnO, SiO, and TiO, have toxic effects on bacteria, other organisms and that of TiO, on green algae having cell wall similar to plants but had a beneficial effect on growth of spinach when applied through seed or spray. But interaction effects of NPs with plants are not fully known and required detailed investigations. This new area of research is catching up in Agricultural Universities and ICAR Institutes that will help understanding further the processes of fertilizer/nutrient transformations and availability in soil-cropping systems as well as of their mechanisms of uptake, translocation and utilization in plants in enhancing fertilizer/nutrient-use efficiency.

Fertilizers

The term fertilizers, organic manures, bio-fertilizers or bio-inoculants are defined as follows.

Chemical fertilizers: These are inorganic or synthetic organic materials of a concentrated nature or salt. These contain one or more plant nutrients easily soluble in water and quickly available forms to plant. As these are concentrated non-bulky materials therefore have the advantage of economy in transport, handling, storage and application to crops. The required amount and proportion of nutrient supply from

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 519

these materials to crops grown on soils of varying fertility can also be easily adjusted or computed.

Organic manures: These are derived from organic sources like plant, animal, and human residues. Among these are bulky organic manures such as farmyard manure (FYM), compost, concentrated manures like oil-cakes, and various products of animal origin like dried blood, fish manure etc.

Biofertilizers or bioinoculants: These are the preparations containing micro- organisms beneficial to agricultural production in terms of nutrient supply, especially N and P.

*South and Central zone, S(for non-hybrids), “(for hybrids) Source: Data compiled and calculated from different sources

The general fertilizer-nutrients recommended for important crops in different regions of the country to achieve optimum productivity are mentioned in Table 16.2. For best results and optimum nutrient vis-a-vis fertilizer-use efficiency, the fertilizer use should be made on the basis of soil test. For achieving target yield of crops on a particular soil, fertilizer use should be made on the basis of targeted yield approaches as described here.

Fertilizer use based on targeted yield: The basis of this approach is the linear relationship between nutrient uptake and yield at economic level. The required parameters are: nutrient requirement in kg/100 (NR), per cent contribution from soil available nutrients (CS) which is obtained from the nutrient uptake from control plots, their soil-test value, and per cent contribution from fertilizer nutrients (CF), which is obtained from the uptake data of treated plot, the CS value and the fertilizer dose applied to the plot. Then the total nutrient requirement for a yield target T is given by:

where FD is the fertilizer dose of a particular nutrient, and ST is the soil test value of that nutrient. By rearranging the equation 1, equation 2 is obtained, which is called adjustment equation. 4

Crop

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE

(Table 16.3 concluded)

Source: Data compiled and calculated from different sources.

where, k1 and k2 are constants. These constants vary with the crop, soil and climate. Such equations on a number of crops or varieties have been generated under the All India Co-ordinated Research Project with 17 cooperating centers throughout the country on Soil Test Crop Response Correlations for different soil-crop-climatic conditions for making fertilizer recommendations for the specific yield targets of crops.

Fertilizers and their use: Soils vary in their capacity to supply different nutrients to different crops. Two soils having the same content of available nutrients may not supply the same amounts of these nutrients even to the same crop. Similarly, the same amount of fertilizer added to two soils may not supply their nutrients in the same amount to the same crop. Under a given situation of soil, the system of farming, soil management, fertilizer and manure practices etc. influence the productivity of soils and crop yield from them.

Source: Fertiliser Statistics. 2007-08. Fertiliser Association of India, New Delhi # = 24 Advance Estimates. *(1,000 bales of 170 kg each), **(1,000 bales of 180 kg each)

The quantities of primary plant nutrients, N, P and K removed from the soils by some of the important crops are given in Table 16.3. The area, production and average yields of crops are given in Table 16.4.

For the present level of 231 million tonnes of foodgrains production the estimated N P K removal is about 32-33 million tonnes against the cosumption of 22.55 million tonnes resulting in a net negative balance of nearly 9-10 million tonnes. Organic manures and biofertilizers contribute 4 million tonnes, indicating that soil has to replenish 6 million tonnes of the negative balance of nutrients. For doubling the productivity, the nutrient removal would be more than double of the present level to 62-64 million tonnes. This becomes a serious soil fertility problem that needs urgent remedial measures. With the efforts to push yields of crops to higher levels through improved varieties of crops and intensive cultivation, the depletion of nutrients from soils will further increase. Erosion and leaching processes will further cause additional nutrient losses. The present production of both NP fertilizers and as nutrient in the country during 2008-09 was 32.86 and 14.29 million tonnes which was almost the same 32.75 and 14.01 as in the previous year 2007-08. While the consumption of both NPK fertilizer and nutrient was appreciably more 50.40 and 25.04 in 2008-09 than 45,90 and 22.55 million tonnes, respectively, in 2007-08.

However N+P,O, nutrient production (million tonnes) in the country was 9.89 in 1991-92 and it increased over the period to 11.20 in 1996-97, 14.43 in 2002-03, 14.61 in 2007-08 and 14.29 in 2008-09, thus the production remained almost constant from 2002-03 onwards. In contrast the consumption of N+P 40, appreciably increased over this period from 11.37 to 13.28, 14.29, 19.91 and 1 .72 million tonnes,

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 523

respectively, and that of N+P,0,+K,O from 27.79 to 31.78, 33.97, 44.96, and 50.40 million tonnes respectively. The gap in consumption or demand and production or supply was met by importing these nutrients/fertilizers. The major cause of constant production of N+P,O, was due to unfavourable policies and economics in increasing the production capacity. Recently the GOI has taken some corrective measures and important policy decisions to help boost domestic fertilizer production and its capacity by the industry to meet the increasing demand with minimal reliance on fertilizer import. The important policy decisions taken in this regard are as follow:

Phosphorus and potassic fertilizers

Diammonium phosphate (DAP): The subsidy has been benchmarked to Import Parity Price (IPP) of DAP that is there will be uniform subsidy both for imported and indigenous DAP based on IPP concept.

Complex fertilizers -NP, NP, NPKS:The price of P,O, , K and S in the complex fertilizers will be determined on the basis of imported DAP, ammonia, murate of potash (MOP) and S.The price of N_ will continue to be determined on unit-wise basis in a rationalized manner.

Single superphosphate (SSP): The MRP price of SSP will be fixed uniformly throughout the country by the central Government on monthly basis to reflect the variation in price of new raw materials or intermediates vis-a-vis indigenous and imported rock phosphate and S rather than fixation of MRP by each State Government. Also for the first time the policy recognized S in SSP while fixing price.

Mono ammonium phosphate (MAP) and triple super phosphate (TSP): Currently these fertilizers are not produced in the country. Imported MOP ( 11-52-0) including the powdered has been brought under the concession scheme w.e.f 1 April, 2007 and that of TSP w.e.f 1 April, 2009. This has helped increase in phosphatic fertilizers in the country.

Nitrogen fertilizers

Urea investment policy: Although for existing import and production, urea is under price control and 50% movement control and subsidy is administered by NPS III to help attract investment in this sector. Also in this policy benchmarking has been made to import, a departure from the cost based approach. The prospects of investments in urea have also brightened by successful exploration and availability of gas from Krisna- Godavery basin (KG basin) in the East coast.

Ammonium sulphate: Indigenous ammonium sulphate (20.6-0-0-23) has been brought under the concession scheme to make available adequate quantity of S- containing fertilizers. As a result its availability has improved in the market place.

Uniform freight reimbursement policy: Under this policy, inland freight for transportation of all fertilizers will be reimbursed to the fertilizer companies from plant or port up to the block level. The rate will be calculated based on actual railway freights and for road transport on the basis of average lead distance off all blocks in the district and the state level truck rates from the rake point to the block. This will help movement of fertilizers to far-flung and inaccessible areas for equitable distribution.

Balanced fertilization and fertilizer-use efficiency: The fertilizer-use efficiency

524 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

on decline due emergence of deficiency one of P followed by K, S, Zn, Fe, B, Mn due to adoption of intensive cultivation and cropping systems on fragile soils like rice-wheat on sandy soils etc. Because we have ignored the soil fertility health, sustained food production, mining of nutrient capital of soil largely due to imbalance use of fertilizers or nutrients. As a result, compound growth rate of production and productivity of green revolution crops— rice, wheat, maize started showing stagnation or a declining trend. balance fertilization or nutrient use is the best medicine for this malady. Balanced nutrient use does not mean, as many consider, use of N, P and K ina fixed ratio. But balance fertilization or nutrient use ensures that plant receive all the essential nutrient elements in adequate amounts and proportion, neither less nor in excess amounts, to meet fully the nutritional requirement of crop(s) or cropping systems ona particular soil to attain optimum or potential crop yield or productivity. Balance nutrient use thus involves both their rates and rations. For example recommended rates of 120 kg N, 60 kg P,O, and 30 kg K,O/ ha for rice provide a balanced ratio of 4:2:1. If one applies 80-40-20 or 40-20-10 the ratio is still 4:2:1. But the rate of nutrient applied are inadequate or less and hence imbalanced nutrient application. It is important that crops should receive nutrient elements in adequate and balanced amounts either from chemical fertilizer or organic manures or through their integrated use for sustainable high crop production and productivity, optimum nutrient-use efficiencies and minimal environmental degradation/risks.

use or and reduces environmental pollution/degradation. In several long-term fertilizer experiments (LTFE) for 22-30 years where exploitive agriculture with imbalance use of nutrients resulted in deficiency of P followed by K, S, Zn etc, the balanced use of P and K along with N reduced markedly the NO,-N accumulation in the soil profile and appreciably enhanced apparent N recovery from 6—17% in maize and 2-32% in wheat to 33-55 and 51-65% respectively. Similarly P-use efficiency markedly increased with N and K application along with P. Also where S deficiency cropped up, application of NPK along with S appreciably increased not only the yield of crops but also S-use efficiency and quality of oilseed crops with respect to edible oil content. The site specific nutrient management (SSNM) practices based on soil tests also addresses the issue of balanced nutrient use and their use efficiency. Such 10 experiments in northern states have yielded high annual grain productivity of 13.3 tonnes/ha or fice-wheat and additional income over the farmer’s practice of Rs 20,530 with a benefit: cost ratio of 4.9. However, the improvement in FUE with balanced use of NPK depends on soil type and its inherent capacity to supply nutrients and the crop. Future researches in the field of nanotechnology, biotechnology and precisionagriculture may help in further improving the low FUE, namely development of slow release fertilizers, nutrient-use efficient cultivars, censor-based precise nutrient application to crops and soils etc. encourage balance fertilization GOI has introduced some new policies including guidance for production of customized fertilizers, introduction of nutrient based pricing scheme and policy for fortified or coated fertilizers as follows:

Fortified or coated fertilizers: The GOI has now allowed fortification of fertilizers as per the specification in Fertilizer Control Order (FCO) subject to 20% of fertilizer company’s total production from June 1, 2008 and their sale at a price up to

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 525

5% above the MRP and for zincated urea and boronated SSP up to 10% above MRP urea and SSP.

Customized fertilizers: These fertilizers are a combination of nutrients, and have to be prepared based on soil testing results and crop requirement. The companies can fix reasonable MRP for the approved grades at their own.

Nutrient-based pricing of subsidized fertilizers: To encourage balanced fertilization, GOI has introduced nutrient-based pricing of subsidized fertilizers, i.e. per unit price of nutrients N, P, K and S will be the same in all complex grade fertilizers. Consequently the MRPs of complex fertilizers have been significantly reduced from 18 June 2008.The nutrient prices of urea, DAP, and MOP are the benchmark for determining the nutrient prices of N, P and K. For the first time S has been recognized as a primary nutrient to be covered under Concession Scheme. These decisions will help in improving nutrient use ratio as well as their balance and efficient use for sustainable soil fertility and agricultural productivity.

These policy changes by the GOI are welcomed by the fertilizer industry and are expected to show their positive impacts soon in increasing fertilizer production by creating additional capacity of production by the domestic producers and their easy accessibility to the farmers at reasonable prices to help increase country agricultural production, productivity and nutritional food for animals and human health on sustainable basis.

Regulating quality of fertilizers: To regulate the quality of fertilizers as per the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO) Act, GOI, there are 68 Fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories in the country to monitor the quality of fertilizers sold in the market. These laboratories have a capacity of analyzing 129,333 samples per annum. Of the 85,886 fertilizer samples analyzed in 2007-08, 6.2% were found sub-standard.

Organic resources

Anumber of diverse organic resources are available for use in agriculture. These are mostly of plant origin and are utilized either directly or after their cycling as food of animals and human. The annual production of residue by major crops is 270 million tonnes containing 5.6 million tonnes of N+ P,O, + K,O. By including other crops, it is estimated at 300 million tonnes. About one-third of the residues produced are available for direct recycling in the fields. Residues used as animal feed can get recycled through dung etc. Two current estimates on nutrient potential of residues are 5.6 and 8.7 million tonnes of N+ P,O, + K,O. The potential annual availability of cattle dung is 2 billion tonnes. It contains 3.44 million tonnes N+ 1.3 million tonnes P,O, +2.21 million tonnes of KO ora total of 7.0 million tonnes nutrients. Another recent estimate of annual animal dung production is 3.2 billion tonnes. Human excreta is another valuable resource.

Organic resources can supplement available fertilizer supplies by 3.9-5.7 million tonnes and thus provide a nutrient capital of 17-19 million tonnes. Organic resources can reduce the mining of soil nutrient resources and improve overall soil productivity. There will be an additional 1.2—1.5 million tonnes crop residues with every million tonnes increase in grain production, additional 0.25 million tonnes dry faeces with every million increase in human population and additional 1.2 million tonnes dry dung/year with every million increase in cattle population (Tandon, 1997. Plant nutrient needs, supply, efficiency and policy issues: 2000-2025, NAAS).

526 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

The most conservative estimates show that hardly 270-300 million tonnes of organic manures of different kinds contributing around 4-6 million tonnes of NPK are available in the country.

The amount of nutrients added through organic manures to the soil is small. Thus the current huge drain on nutrient supplies is replenished by natural or artificial means. The principal methods to supplement natural recuperation and for improving the productive capacity of the soils are to add organic matter vis-a-vis organic manures to the soils to furnish more or less a continuous supply system of nutrients to the crops, and to apply fertilizer nutrients to restore lost soil fertility or productivity. The supply of additional plant nutrients through fertilizers and manures would attain further supreme importance, highlighting the necessity to meet the nutrient requirements of increasing agricultural production, e.g. food, forage, fruits, fibre and fuel, for the continually expanding human and cattle population.

Types of manures: Since time immemorial different kinds of organic manures have been used to improve and sustain soil productivity. These manures are classified into (i) bulky organic manures, (i?) concentrated organic manures, and (iii) biofertilizers, depending upon their nature and quality,

Bulky organic manures: These are farmyard manure (FYM), compost, and green manure (GM) added in a large quantity because of their bulk, mainly to improve physical condition of the soil, replenish and maintain its humus status vis-a-vis soil organic matter (SOM), create optimum conditions for the activities of soil microorganisms and contribute a small part of the plant nutrients removed by the crops or otherwise lost through leaching and soil erosion. They thus supply practically all the elements of soil fertility, that the crops require, though not in adequate amounts and in right proportions. The plant-food elements contained in manure are released in an available form upon decomposition by soil microorganisms. The main role of these manures is to add organic matter and humus content. The properties and the roles of organic matter and humus in the soil are as follows:

1. Coarse organic matter on the surface reduces the impact of the falling raindrops and thus reduces surface run-off and erosion.

2. Easily decomposable organic residues lead to synthesis of complex organic substances that bind soil particles into structural units called aggregates, which help maintain favourable condition of aeration and permeability.

3. Organic matter increases water-holding capacity of soil.

4. Organic matter adds and serves as a reservoir of essential nutrients which are released in harmony with the needs of the plants.

5. It produces organic acids that help in dissolving unavailable forms of potassium, phosphorus, micronutrients etc. in soils.

6. It increases exchange capacity as well as buffering capacity of the soils.

7. It serves as a source of energy for the growth of soil microorganisms as well as food for such life as earthworms, ants and rodents.

8. Organic mulches reduce evaporation losses and maintain optimum soil temperature.

The nutrient content of manures and other organic raw materials are shown in Table 16.5.

FARMYARD MANURE— Good quality farmyard is perhaps the most valuable source

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 527

16.5 Per cent nutrient contents of manure and other organic raw materials

Source: Fertilizer Statistics. 2007-08, and Handbook on Fertilizer Usages. 1994. Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi.

To obtain kg nutrient/t multiply per cent nutrient in the material by a factor of ten.

of organic matter and nutrients to a soil for vegetables, fruits, fodder and grain crops. It consists of a mixture of cattle dung, the bedding used in the stable and of any remnants of straw and plant stalks fed to the cattle. More than 50% of the cattle dung is not available for agriculture, because it is burnt as fuel due to energy shortage in the rural areas. Under Indian conditions average content of plant nutrients N, P,O, and K,O are 0.3, 0.15 and 0.3%, respectively, when compared with 1.0, 0.3 and 1.0% in the European countries.

About half of the N and K, and one-sixth of P are readily soluble and subject to dissipation. However, these losses can be reduced greatly by using an absorbent bedding for cattle, storing dung in stone-or brick-lined pits, mixing large quantities of straw and other vegetable matters with cattle dung, and keeping the heap compact and moist. Thus the loss of soluble mineral elements through seepage is prevented, bacterial decomposition of raw organic matter is encouraged, plant nutrients are made soluble and nitrogen losses are minimized. The relative absorbency of different materials during 24 hr of soaking is 6.0, 4.4, 2.8, 2.2, 0.5 and 0.25 water/kg peat, saw dust, pea straw, wheat straw, soil and sand respectively, if urine cannot be conserved in the bedding used for cattle, it should be collected in a covered concrete cistern and then added to dung in the manure pit. To reduce losses of urine N through volatilization of NH,, the manure and the urine-soaked absorptive litter for bedding should be kept compacted in a pit. The pit may be 1.0 m in depth, 1.3 to 1.5 m in width and 4.5 to 6 m in length, depending upon the number of cattle on a farm. The filling of the pit should be sectional, and when each section of 1.3 m in length is filled to about 45 cm above the ground level, 4 to 5 buckets of water should be added and then plastered with 2.5 cm layer of a mixture of mud and dung in equal proportions. Plastering conserves moisture, nitrogen and prevents the housefly nuisance. The manure becomes ready for use in 4-5 months.

IMPROVEMENT IN QUALITY OF FARMYARD MANURE- Feeding the cattle with concentrated feeds of cotton-seed, cotton-seed cake, linseed-meal, soy-meal, wheat bran, grain husk, groundnut cake, gram and horsegram that are rich in N, P, K, Mg and S can improve the quality of manure, because up to 80% of these mineral elements are recovered in urine and faeces. Also manure from cattle fed on cereal straws and grass hay is much less valuable than that from animals fed on legume hays, grains and concentrates. Calcium sulphate or gypsum and superphosphate are used as preservatives, which help prevent the loss of ammonia. These materials, besides absorbing ammonia, supply additional Ca, S and P and thus improve crop-producing capacity of the manure.

MANURE APPLICATION—Partially rotten farmyard manure should be applied 3-4 weeks before sowing a crop, when the soil has sufficient moisture for its decomposition. Its application too long before sowing a crop will cause serious loss of ammonia and nitrates. If the manure is well rotted, it is useful to apply it just before sowing the crop, particularly in sandy soils, to avoid loss of nitrogen. The manure should be evenly spread and worked into the soil. The practice of leaving the manure in small heaps scattered in the field for several days results in serious deterioration of its quality. The application of well-rotten manure in conjunction with fertilizers to young plants of fruits and vegetables individually gives better results.

PRACTICE OF PENNING IN THE FIELD— The practice of penning cattle, sheep and goats in the field in summer is common in some parts of the country. Holding 7,000 sheep for

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 529

one night adds about 14.9 tonnes dung. The fresh dung left in the field in such cases rapidly dries up checking ammonification and loss of nitrogen. With the first fall of rain, the dung is worked into the soil to retain much of its manurial value.

RATE OF APPLICATION— The quantity of farmyard manure to be applied to unirrigated crops varies from 1.5 to 2 cartloads (about | tonne)/ha). If sufficient farmyard manure is not available, it may be applied at the usual rate to a part of the land, say to one-third or one-fourth of the area, in rotation every year so that all parts of the field receive the manure regularly once in 3-4 years. For irrigated field crops the rate varies from 5 to 10 tonnes/ha (10 to 20 cartloads), and for sugarcane, maize, turmeric, ginger, vegetables and fruits 7.5 to 15 tonnes/ ha.

CoMPOSTED MANURE: RuRAL Compost— The compost is prepared from wastes of all kinds of farmhouse and cattle shed supplies of organics. Composting is the process of reducing plant and animal refuse to a product that is in a quickly utilizable condition. Good compost manure, similar in appearance and fertilizer nutrient value as that of farmyard manure can be produced from waste material of various kinds, viz. cereal straws, crop stubble, cotton stalks, groundnut husk, farm weeds and grasses, leaves, leaf-mould, house refuse, wood ashes, litter, urine-soaked earth from cattle sheds and other similar substances. These raw plant materials are rich in cellulose and other readily decomposable carbohydrates, and have nearly a carbon: nitrogen ratio of 40 : 1 or more. It is necessary to compost or partially decompose them to reduce the carbon- nitrogen ratio to about 10:1 or 12:1 to check immobilization of soil and added N. The production of rural compost (million t) increased over the years from 252 in 1987 to 280 in 1991-92 and then declined to 226 in 1995-96, 134 in 1998-99 and 129 in 2004-05 may be due to its burning and diversion as animal feed and some industrial use as source of fuel/energy.

METHODS OF COMPOST PREPARATION— Aerobic and anaerobic methods of decomposition are used to prepare compost from waste organic material. In both cases the farm- waste is used as bedding for cattle to absorb a large portion of animal urine.

AEROBIC DECOMPOSITION— In this process the used bedding, the sweepings from cattle sheds and some urine-soaked earth from the stable floor are removed every day, mixed with a little cattle dung and 2 or 3 handfuls of wood ashes are deposited on a well- drained site to gradually build up a low pile of 30 to 45 cm in height, 5 m in width and of any convenient length. The pile is built up before the start of the rainy season. After the first heavy showers, the wetted materials in a 1.2 m strip on each side of the long heap are turned with a rake on to a 2.4 m wide strip in the middle, raising the height of the heap to nearly 1 m. This process prevents the loss of moisture and ensures a quick start of decomposition process. When the heap sinks appreciably in 3-4 weeks, it is given a turning and made into a fresh heap, thus mixing the outside material with that from inside. After about a month, depending on the incidence of rains, the heap is given a final turning on a cloudy or moderately rainy day, and re-built in the vacant part of the original position. The compost becomes ready for use in 4 months. The method is better suited for composting in the rainy season. The proportion of raw materials considered suitable for compost making is 400, 56, 60 and 6 parts by weight of mixed farm residues and cattle-shed wastes, urine-soaked earth, fresh cattle dung and wood ashes.

In Tamil Nadu 90 kg of partially fermented dung as thin suspension with 22.5 kg

bone meal/tonne dry material is composted. If urine-soaked earth and cattle dung are not available, the raw organic materials can still be composted, provided more than one-third of the residues is soft and finely broken, viz. fallen leaves, leaf mould, kitchen wastes, grass clippings, green and succulent weeds, plant trimmings, and chopped straw of wheat, barley and soft cereal. The use of ordinary soil and wood ashes or lime is, however, essential.

ANAEROBIC DECOMPOSITION— In this process the mixed farm residues are collected in pits of convenient size, e.g. 4.5m x 1.5m x 1 m. Each day’s collection is spread in a thin layer, sprinkled with a mixture of fresh cow-dung (4.5 kg), ashes (140-170 g) and water (18-22 litres) and compacted. The pit is filled till the raw material stands 38-46 cm above its edge and is then plastered with 2.5 cm layer of a mixture of mud and cowdung. The plastered pit also prevents the fly nuisance. The compacted moist material becomes composted in 4-5 months without any further attention. The well- made compost contains 0.8 to 1% N and has all the good properties of farmard manure. It can be used in the same way as the farmyard manure. The anaerobic process is particularly suited for use by gardeners in or near cities and towns.

Town compost: URBAN Compost— In recent years large-scale composting of town refuse and night-soil in properly constructed trenches away from human habitation has been taken up successfully by the municipalities of many large and small cities. Trenches | to 1.2 m wide, 75 cm deep and of convenient length are filled with successive layers of night soil, town refuse and earth, in that order. The compost gets ready in 3 months. About 57 million tonnes of urban solid wastes generated per annum have potential to provide good quality compost in the country. The production of urban compost (million tonnes) ranged between 6.2 and 6.8 from 1987-88 to 1995-96 and then declined to 4.8 — 5.3 in 1996-99 and again markedly increased to 12.9 in 2004- 05 may be due to better management and processing of litter in big cities/metros.

SEWAGE AND SLUDGE— Sewage: It is used water and waste substances that are produced by human beings and factories and collected through sewers or special pipes. There is a ban on the dumping of such raw or untreated sewage at rivers, sea and land as it leads to their pollution. The sewage treated with chemicals to clean it, can be dumped into the rivers or sea or used to make manure. Wherever available, the farmers especially the vegetable growers use it as manure in the outskirts of big cities.

Sludge: It is the thick soft wet mud or solid matter or substance that accumulates at the base of the sewage storage tank. The industrial or humane waste that has been treated is termed as industrial or chemical sludge and is used as sewage-sludge as fertilizer or manure on farmland.

The liquid waste, e.g. sludge and sewage, contains large quantities of plant nutrients and is used for growing sugarcane, vegetables and fodder crops near many large towns. Its usage make the soil quickly sewage sick owing to the mechanical clogging by colloidal matter in the sewage and the development of anaerobic organisms, which not only reduce the nitrates already present in the soil but also cause alkalinity. For these reasons a settling or a septic tank is constructed in which sewage is allowed to stand to relieve it of the heavier portion of the solid matter, or to undergo a preliminary fermentation. The effluent from the settling tank, however, still carries a large amount of objectionable colloidal matter and the deposit of sludge that settle in the tank is of small manurial value besides being often offensive. It is necessary to remove these by

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 531

thoroughly aerating the sewage in the settling tank by blowing air through it. The sludge that settles at the bottom in this process is called activated sludge. It has a valuable property of bringing about rapid oxidation of the organic matter present in fresh sewage. Generally it contains 3-6% N, 2-3% P,O, and 1.0-2.8% K,O. The effluent becomes a clear, odourless liquid containing nitrates in solution, and is free from most of the pathogenic bacteria. Both the activated sludge and the effluent can be used with safety for manuring and irrigating crops. However, under no circumstances should any produce grown on the sewage-treated soil of farm be eaten raw or uncooked.

Improvement in nutrient content of composts

A number of technologies and microbial cultures are available through which the nutrient content of composts can be improved and time taken for producing compost can be reduced, e.g. P-enriched compost or phosphocompost.

Phosphocompost/N-enriched phosphocompost

Bio-solids produced at farms or in cities and agro-industries generally have low nutrient content, particularly of P thus not economically viable. Therefore traditional technology of composting has been improved to develop phosphocompost/N-enriched phosphocompost using phosphate-solubilizing bacteria/microorganisms (PSB), namely Aspergillus awamori, Pseudomonas straita and Bacillus megaterium; phosphate rock, pyrite and bio-solids to increase the manurial value. These compost have been found beneficial.

For the production of one tonne of phosphocompost, about 1,900 kg organic/ vegetable wastes/straw, 200 kg cow-dung dry weight basis and 250 kg rock phosphate (18% P,O,) are used. Prepare a base (3 m long, 3 m wide, 15 cm thick) of the heap out of hard, woody materials such as sticks etc. Place bio-solids layer (30 cm + 10 cm) over this base Sprinkle slurry prepared by mixing cow-dung and rock phosphate over the crop residues to moisten the material. Continue making such layers, each with a reduced area, until the heap is 1.5 m high with tapers of about 0.5 m. Add water to the heap to maintain 60-70 % moisture. Cover the heap with soil or polythene. Mix the material after 15 days and give two turnings after 30 and 45 days and add water at each turning to maintain 60-70% moisture content. The compost will be ready within 90-100 days period. For preparing N-enriched phosphocompost, N as urea at the rate of 0.5—1% (w/w), rock phosphate and pyrite at the rate of 12.5% ( w/ w) and 10% (w/w), respectively, are added into the composting mixture.

The phosphocompost contains 2.0- 8.0 % P, 12-14 % N as compared to 0.32-0.60 % P and 0.5—0.8 % N in normal compost or FYM. And N-enriched phosphocompost contains 1.4-1.6% N. Results of ICAR co-ordinated research project on “Microbiological decomposition under irrigated and rainfed conditions” showed that use of phosphocompost, as that of P fertilizers, meets fully the P requirement of various crops. Also cost of application of P/ha from these enriched compost is much less than the P fertilizers.

Vermicomopost

Open permanent pits are constructed under the tree shade about 61cm (2 feet) above ground to avoid entry of water by constructing a brick wall with 5-6 holes of 10 cm

diameter for aeration. The holes are covered with 100-mesh nylon screen to check escape of earthworms. About 3 cm layer of partially decomposed dung is spread on the bottom of the pits followed by a layer of litter/residue and dung in the ratio of 1:1 (w/w). Thereafter these layers of 3 cm of partially decomposed dung followed by that of litter plus dung are repeated up to height of 6] cm. The material in the pit is inoculated with two species of epigeic earthworms, viz. Lisenia foetida and Perionyx excavatus. Moisture content is maintained at 60-70% often applying water with sprinkler throughout the decomposition period and keeping the pit covered with jute bags. The materials is allowed to decompose for about 3 weeks to stabilize the temperature and to reach the mesophilic stage, Earthworms are introduced in the pit or heap, i.c. 10 adult earthworms per kg waste material (about 500 worms/pit or heap). The material is allowed to decompose for 110 days. The forest litter gets decomposed at a faster rate (75 to 85 days) than the farm residue (110-115 days). In the heap method, worm inoculation channels are made by hand and earthworm at the rate of 10 kg/tonne waste material are inoculated. In the case of P-enriched vermicompost, rock phosphate (30-32% P.O.) is used at the rate of 2.5% P,O, of waste material The vemicompost contains 29-27 % C, 1.9-2.0 %N, 2.0% P,O, (4.0 % P,O, in P-enriched compost) and 0.85 % K,O.

NIGHT-sOIL OF PoUDRETTE—Since human excrements are a potential source of soil improvement, public heath authorities in many towns make the necessary arrangements for its conservation into a form in which it can be safely used as manure. The dehydration of night-soil, or after admixture with absorbing materials, e.g. soil, ash, charcoal, and sawdust, produces an odourless material containing 1.32%N, 2.8 % P,O,, 4.1% K,O and 24.3% lime. The addition of 40 to 50% sawdust to the night-soil yields straightway a dry, acidic poudrette, which may contain 2 or 3% nitrogen. The annual potential quantity of manurial ingredients in the night-soil is about 1.35 million tonnes/100 million populations.

MANURE— manuring (GM) is an age-old practice and constitute a valuable potential source of organic matter and N, particularly if it is a legume crop, which has the ability to acquire N from the air with the help of its root-nodule bacteria. Green manure also adds and increases the availability of several other plant nutrients through its favourable effects on chemical, physical and biological properties of the soil. The area under green manure crops varied from 5.7 to 6.7 million ha from 1987- 88 to 1991-92 and declined significantly to 2.3 - 3.5 million ha from 1995-96 to 2005-08 despite N saving, yield increase and improvement in soil physical, chemical and biological properties. In Uttar Pradesh it declined from 11 to 0.01 lakh ha. The decline during this period in Andhra Pradesh, was from 4.33 to 0.31, Gujarat 2.1 to 0.2, Punjab 2.59 to 1.43 and Haryana 2.59 to 1.43 lakh ha.Green manuring is practiced in rice, wheat, sugarcane, potato crops etc. A leguminous crop of 45 to 60 days can add up to more than 200 kg N/ha when ploughed under; generally it is around 100 kg/ ha green manure N, which corresponding to the average amount of mineral fertilizer N applied to most agricultural crops, is as efficient as fertilizer N. Green manure can add 60-120 kg N/ha and can even meet the entire N demand of a crop to which these are applied. Sixty days old Crotalaria juncea accumulated highest quantity of NPK (160 kg N+20.5 kg P+127 kg K/ha). The C:N ratio was 14:15 and 18:19 at 30 and 60 days growth stage respectively. The green manure crops also act as mulch and provide

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 533

protective cover against erosion and’ leaching. Green manuring thus helps improve soil fertility and should be practiced wherever feasible. The crops most commonly used for green manuring in this country are dhaincha (Sesbania cannabina; syn. S. aculeata), sunnhemp (Crotalaria juncea), cowpea (Vigna unguiculata), horsegram (Macrotyloma uniflorum), berseem or Egyptian clover (Trifolium alexandrinum), clusterbean (Cyamopsis tetragonoloba), senji (Melilotus parviflora), pillipesara (Vigna trilobata), \entil (Lens culinaris) etc. Dhaincha is versatile flood-tolerant green manure that can be adapted to varying soil and climatic conditions. Sunnhemp (Crotalaria juncea) and wild Indigo (Tephrosia purpurea) are important drought-tolerant legumes.

Dhaincha, sunnhemp and cowpea are the major green manure crops capable of accumulation of 4—5 tonnes/ha of dry biomass and 100 kg N/ha in 50-60 days when well managed. These crops are well suited to almost all parts of the country and fit in well with most of the crop rotation or cropping systems having a fallow period of more than 45 days, e.g. sugarcane, potato, garden crops and the second season paddy crop in southern India and with irrigated wheat-based crop rotations in the northern India. Dhaincha is in wide use in Asom, Bengal, Bihar, Haryana, Punjab, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh. It does well on alkaline and waterlogged soils.

Green manuring with these crops is better suited for rice-based cropping systems. In northern India rice-wheat is the most important cropping system with a lag period of 45-70 days after wheat harvest or up to 90 days. If Basmati rice is the crop of the rotation, for raising suitable green manure crop and incorporating into the soil during land preparation for rice cultivation, short-duration grain legumes mungbeen (greengram) and cowpea are also raised during the lag period, and aftrer picking pods the residue is incorporated into the soil. Forage legume, e.g. cowpea is also grown, and a portion of the crop is used as fodder and the rest as green manure. Similarly, green-manuring is practiced in wheat—maize, potato-based cropping systems, viz. potato—sunflower/wheat rotations, having 120-130 days of fallow period after harvest of wheat and in oilseed-based cropping systems such as toria—sunflower/wheat rotation with lag period of 100 days before sowing foria. Monsoon during the lag period helps in taking dual-purpose grain legumes with minimum input of water. Green manure crops are also inter-planted with cotton and sugarcane and incorporated into the soil after 45-60 days. The practice of raising green manure crops along with main crop and its incorporation after 30-40 days is known as live green manure. The live green manure of cowpea in direct seeded rice that received 50% NPK gave 96% rice yield as that with 100% NPK in Himachal Pradesh hence contributed 50% of NPK for dryland Tice.

Green manure crops of clusterbean, berseem, senji, cowpea, horsegram, lucerne (Medicago sativa) or any legume crop most suited to soil, cropping systems and climatic conditions are used. Some of these crops are partly used as fodder before their use as green manure.

The limitations of green manure adoptions with many farmers are non-availability of land and water resources for sowing green manure crops, difficulty in adjusting green manure crop in multiple cropping systems, and non-availability of good quality seeds of green manure crops.

LEGUMES IN ROTATION— Legumes improve soil fertility because of their N,-fixing ability. Legumes can fix 50-500 kg N/ha depending upon the crop and its growth

period. It is estimated that in India legumes fix 2.47 million tonnes N per annum. In general, benefits of legumes to the succeeding non-legume crops are observed consistently. Legumes leave 25-100 kg N/ha for the succeeding crops. Improvements in cereal yield up to 0.5 to 3 tonnes/ha following monocropped legumes are reported. Growing legumes in rotation improves the mineral N content and N mineralization potential in the soil as well as soil microbial activity, soil structure, water-holding capacity, buffering capacity and release of growth-promoting substances.

Roots and stubbles of pulse legumes return to soil the small quantities of organic matter rich in N. The growing of quick-maturing, short-duration legume pulses, viz. greengram, blackgram, after wheat in Haryana, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh, and wheat and rabi sorghum in Maharashtra are valuable practices for soil fertility improvement. All the leguminous crops leave the soil in a better physical condition and richer in N. Some soil fertility-enriching practices are the growing of pulses mixed with cereals all over India, the intercropping of cotton with groundnut or with tur (Cajanus cajan) in the central and southem parts or with clusterbean, greengram and moth (Vigna aconitifolia) in Punjab and adjoining states; the growing of wheat mixed with peas and gram in northern and central India; and the growing of fodder sorghum mixed with Dolichos labab in some parts of Tamil Nadu.

AZOoLLA~ It can be used both as a green manure before transplanting of rice and as dual crop after transplanting, depending on water availability. Incorporation of one crop of Azolla increased the grain yield of rice equivalent to that obtained with 25-30 kg N/ha urea, whereas 2 to 3 crops of Azolla equivalent to 60 to 90 kg fertilizer N/ha. The cultivation of Azolla is labour intensive.

MANURE- In localities near forest in Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh, the paddy crop is often manured with green forest leaves. These are incorporated into the soil at the time of puddling. In recent year, Gliricidia maculata and Sesbania speciosa are planted on the borders of paddy field or in other vacant spaces to provide green leaf for manuring the paddy crop. Similary, Sesbania speciosa seedlings planted 10 cm apart on paddy borders produce 1,000 to 2,500 kg green leaf for manuring 0.4 ha paddy. Pongamia pinnata (karanj), Tephrosia, Terminalia, Indigofera zollingeriana; syn. I. teysmanni and other trees yielding large quantities of leaves are planted for use as a green manure. For the proper rotting of green manure it is necessary that the green material is succulent and there is adequate moisture in the soil. Plants at the flowering stage contain the greatest bulk of succulent organic matter with low C : N ratio. The incorporation of the green manure crop into the soil at this stage allows quick liberation of N in the available form. With advancing age, the percentage of carbonaceous matter in the plants increases and that of N decreases. If material with a wide C: N ratio is ploughed under, microorganisms bring about its decomposition, draw upon the released N and mineral nutrients, and cause a temporary nutrient deficiency.

The increase in yield after green manuring is usually 30-50%. The fertilizing value of the legume crop can be increased greatly by manuring it with super phosphate. This practice not only increases the P content of the green manure plants but also encourages their plant growth on the whole, thus converting inorganic fertilizer into organic manure. Green manure leaves a marked residual effect also.

Among several environmental factors that are known to affect the performance of

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 535

Source: Fertilizer Statistics. 2007-08; and Handbook of Fertilizer Usages. 1994. Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi.

To obtain kg nutrient/tonne multiply per cent nutrient in the material by a factor of ten.

legume-Rhizobium symbiosis, the most important under north Indian conditions are irrigations or rainfall during establishment and growth of green manure crop and deficiency of phosphorus in the soil.

Concentrated organic manures. The common concentrated organic manures are of two types, viz. (i) oilcakes and (ii) materials of animal origin. Oilcakes are also of two types (i) non-edible, viz. cakes of castor, mahua, karanj, neem, safflower etc; and (Zi) edible, viz. cakes of cotton seed, groundnut, linseed, soybean meal, niger, rapeseed, sesame or ¢i/ and coconut. The nutrient contents (%) of oilcake are given in Table 16.6.

Biofertilizers. These are bio-inoculants (Table 16.7) or preparations containing microorganisms that supply nutrients especially nitrogen and phosphorus. On the basis of nutrient supply, these are broadly classified in two types, viz. (a) N and (b) P contributers. Nitrogen supply may take place through N fixing microorganisms, viz. (i) free living, (ii) symbiotic, and (iii) associative symbiosis. Phosphorus supply takes place through (i) phosphate solubilizer, and (ii) phosphate absorber. A survey of soybean nodulation and inoculant usage in 40 districts of Madhya Pradesh indicates best nodulation and yield level wherever FYM and rhizobial inoculants used together. Studies on molecular diversity of soybean rhizobia show that these soils mostly harbour slow growing species that have high genetic diversity and evolution of native population. Agricultural practices generally promoted greater microbial population.

Generally, 200 g biofertilizer is suspended in 200 to 400 ml water to make slurry, which is poured on 10-12 kg seeds slowly and mixed thoroughly with culture. The culture-treated seeds are then spread on clean paper or floor for drying in shades and sown immediately. In the country the capacity of producing of biofertilizers is 26,864 tonnes and 15,871 tonnes of biofertiliizers were produced during 2006-07 which is almost double than 7,882 tonnes produced during 2002-03. It is skewed and 84% of inoculants production is in southern and western parts of the country. The poor quality and short shelf-life of the biofertilizers is the main cause of their less popularity among the farmers. There is a need to establish effective mother culture facility in the country. Recently liquid cultures containing cell protectants have been developed that help in maintaining high microbial numbers and promote the formation of resting cells like cysts and spores having resistance to abiotic stresses. The liquid media formulations containing varying concentrations of arabinose trachalose, glycerol and polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP) maintained higher cell count of the inoculants Rhizobium, Azospirillum and P-solubilizing Bacillus magaterium even after one year of storage compared to commonly used lignite carrier (AINP on Biofertilizers Research Report 2004-07, IISS, Bhopal).

Chemical fertilizers. These are inorganic or synthetic organic materials of concentrated nature. They are applied mainly to increase the supply of one or more essential nutrients and nutrient elements in the form of soluble or readily available chemical compounds. Being concentrated materials, these have the advantage of ease in storage, transport, handling and thereby economy. Further, their application can be conveniently made in proportions to the actual requirements of different soil-cropping Systems. These are classified as (i) straight fertilizers which contain one or single

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 537

nutrient, viz. nitrogenous, phosphatic and potassic fertilizer, (ii) complex fertilizer which contain two or more nutrients in chemical combination, viz. diammonium phosphate, and (ii) mixed fertilizers which contain two or more nutrients as a physical mixture, viz. NPK fertilizer of 15-15-15 grade, and (iv) micronutrient fertilizers. The major forms of these fertilizers are as follows:

Bulk blended fertilizers—Solid fertilizer materials blended together in small blending plants, delivered to the farm in bulk, and usually spread directly on the fields by truck or other special applicators.

Granulated fertilizers—Fertilizers that are present in the form of stable granules of uniform size, which facilitate ease of handling the materials and reduce undesirable dust.

Liquid fertilizers—Fluid fertilizers that contain essential elements in liquid forms, either as soluble nutrients, as liquid suspensions, or both.

Mixed fertilizers—Two or more fertilizer materials mixed together. May be as dry powder, granules, pellets, bulk blends, or liquids.

$= Sales figures.

#for direct application; “Imported 27-37; Jhabua 18-27; Udaipur 18-34, Purulia 18-20.

$, Sales figures.

“DAP=Diammonium phosphate; APSN=ammonium phosphate sulphate nitrate; APS= am- monium phosphate sulphate; MAP=monoammonium phosphate; UAP=urea ammonium phos- phate; # The amounts of import of DAP and MAP were 383,200 and 100,000 tonnes respectively, T included in APS (20-20-0). $= Sales figures.

“Nitro phosphate with potash; **All the fertilizers with sulphate composition are also termed as sulphur carrying fertilizers. N-P-K (14-28-14), no production in 2008-09. $= Sales figures.

Source: Fertilizer Statistics. 2007-08. Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi.

Straight fertilizers—These are grouped into nitrogenous, phosphatic and potassic, sulphur, micronutrients (zinc, iron etc.) fertilizers. Production, import and consumption of the fertilizers is shown in Table 16.8 (a-e).

NITROGENOUS FERTILIZERS— These are divided into nitrate, ammonia and ammonium salts and chemical compounds containing nitrogen in the amide form. During 2008- 2009, among the nitrogenous fertilizers (N and N-P) maximum consumption of 67.3% was of urea, followed by 23.8% of diammonium phosphate, 6.32% of APS (20-20-0) and 2.6 % of others- ammonium sulphate, calcium ammonium nitrate (CAN), MAP, APS (16-20-0) and UAP (26-28-0).

AMMONIUM SULPHATE (NH,),SO,- It is a white crystalline salt containing 20 to 21% ammoniacal nitrogen (NH,-N) and 24% sulphur (as SO,). It is manufactured from sulphuric acid and ammonia synthesized from atmospheric N. It is easy to handle and stores well under dry conditions. It is very suitable for wetland crops, e.g., paddy, jute etc. It is also useful for all other crops grown on a wide variety of soils. It has an acid

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 539

effect on soils, therefore it should preferably be used on alkaline soils, deficient both in N and S and not on acid soils, except the acid-loving crops like tea. Its application to acid tea soils generally deficient in S considerably improves the yield and quality of tea, It can be applied before or at sowing time, or as a top-dressing to the growing crop. But it should not be applied along with or too close to the seed, because it affects seed germination very adversely, Duc to its excellent physical properties, (NH,),SO, is very suitable for use in dry mixtures of P and K fertilizers. However it should not be mixed with lime, which results in loss in N.

AMMONIUM NITRATE- It is produced from the reaction of ammonia and nitric acid, and is a white crystalline salt, containing 33 to 35%N, half as nitrate nitrogen and half in the ammonium form. In the ammonium form it cannot be easily leached out from the soil because of its higher adsorption and fixation than the NO, ions. This fertilizer is quick acting, but is highly hygroscopic and not fit for storage. Granulation of the material and a light coating of the granules with oil reduce its hygroscopic property to some extent. It has an acidulating effect on the soil. Under certain circumstances it is explosive, and therefore it should be handled cautiously.

AMMONIUM SULPHATE NITRATE- It is a mixture of ammonium nitrate and ammonium sulphate and contains 32.5% N, out of which it supplies three-fourths of total nitrogen (26%) in the ammoniacal form and the rest (6.5%) as nitrate nitrogen. It is available in a white crystalline form or as dirty white granules. It is readily soluble in water and is very quick acting but highly hygroscopic. It is useful for all crops and has good keeping quality. It is also acidic but 50% less than that of (NH,),SO,.

CALCIUM AMMONIUM NITRATE (CAN)- It is also called nitro-lime or nitro-chalk, and consists of a mixture of ammonium nitrate and powdered chalk and is made into granules coated with soapstone. It is a fine, free flowing, and light brown or gray granular fertilizer. It is almost neutral and can be safely applied even to acid soils. Its total N content varies from 25 to 28% having equal proportion of ammoniacal and nitrate forms. According to the prescribed standards its moisture content should not exceed 1% by weight and the calcium nitrate content should not be more than 0.5% by weight. Regarding the particle size, 90% of the materials should pass through 4 mm IS sieve and be retained on a | mm IS sieve but not more than 5% shall be below 1 mm.

AMMONIUM CHLORIDE- It is prepared by combining ammonia with hydrochloric acid, or obtained as a co-product in the manufacture of soda ash. It is a white crystalline compound possessing a good physical condition and containing 26% ammoniacal nitrogen. In general it is similar to ammonium sulphate in action but is more acidic. It is usually not recommended for tomato, tobacco and such other crops as may be injured by chlorine.

Urea—In India maximum amount of N is used as urea; hence it is the most popular fertilizer. It is a synthetic, white, crystalline organic compound produced by chemically reacting ammonia and carbon dioxide. It is highly concentrated containing 45 to 46% of non-protein organic N. It is produced in granular or pellet forms coated with a non- hygroscopic inert material. It is highly soluble in water, quick acting but subject to rapid leaching and runoff losses. To minimize these losses, several modified forms of urea have been developed, such as urea super-granules (large sized urea granules), as well as S-coated, lac-coated, neem-coated urea. When applied to soil, its nitrogen rapidly changes into ammonia.

ANHYDROUS AMMONIA~ Ammonia is a colourless, pungent gas containing 82% N. It should contain a minimum of 99% ammonia. Under suitable conditions of temperature and pressure it becomes liquefied and is handled as liquid during storage and transportation. Because of its volatile nature, it has to be applied 10-20 cm deep into the soil through special applicators. It is the low-priced N source. Losses due to leaching of N are much less. As relatively expensive equipment is required for its distribution, storage and application, it is more suitable for large farms.

PHOSPHATIC FERTILIZERS— These contain the nutrient element P as phosphate. In fertilizer trade the phosphorus content is expressed as phosphoric anhydride or in terms of P,O,. Different terms are used to describe the availability of P from phosphate materials, viz. (a) water soluble phosphorus, the amount of P extracted by water, (5) citrate soluble phosphorus, the amount of P extractable by a solution of neutral I N ammonium citrate, and (c) citrate-insoluble P, the amount of phosphorus remaining in the residue after water and citrate extraction. These extracted amounts of P are expressed as the percentage of the total weight of sample. The sum of water-soluble and citrate- soluble phosphorus represents an estimate of the fraction available to the plant. The sum of citrate insoluble and available P represents the total P content in the fertilizer. Different phosphatic fertilizers are shown in Table 16.9.

$, Sales figures. (Sales figures in randomized biennials) Source: Fertiliser Statistics. 2007-08. FAI, New Delhi

Among the phosphatic fertilizers, the most abundantly consumed fertilizer is the complex fertilizer: diammonium phosphate (49.8%), followed by APS (20-20-0) (13.2%), SSP (12.7%), NPK (10-26-26) (12.5%) and rest 11.7% by others mixed NP and NPK fertilizers.

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 541

Rock prosruate— Rock phosphate occurs as the natural mineral deposits particularly in the USA, Russia, Tunisia, Morocco, Israel, Jordan, Algeria, India and several other countries. In India extensive deposits of commercial significance were found near Udaipur in Rajasthan and Mussoorie in Uttaranchal, besides some deposits in Singbhum district of Bihar and Jhabua districts of Madhya Pradesh, and near Visakhapatnam and Thiruchirapalli, The mineral in these deposits is known as apatite, which has the general formula Ca,,(PO,CO,),(F, Cl, OH),. This mineral occurs in several forms, viz. carbonate, fluoro-, chloro-, or hydroxy-apatite. Depending upon the source, the composition of rock phosphate varies, but it generally contains about 18-34% P,O, and varying amounts of other impurities like lime, silicate, fluorine, iron, aluminium etc. Its phosphate is not soluble in water, but an amount of less than 30% may be citrate-soluble. Rock phosphate is grounded and marketed for direct application in acid soils provided it contains a minimum of 18% P,O, and the particles are such that a minimum of 90% passes through 0.15 mm IS sieve and the balance 10% through 0.25 mm IS sieve. Acidulated rock phosphate and rock phosphate-enriched compost are also good suppliers of phosphate.

SINGLE SuPERPHOSPHATE (SSP)- It has been a popular and widely used P-fertilizer in India. But now complex high-analysis fertilizers have virtually replaced it. However, it is manufactured by treating ground rock phosphate with sulphuric acid. It is a gray to brownish powder and contains monocalcium phosphate and calcium sulphate (gypsum) in almost equal proportions. There are two grades of SSP, viz. grade I and II, contains minimum 16 and 14% water-soluble P.O, respectively. When SSP is applied to soil, the monocalcium phosphate in it readily reverts to less water-soluble dicalcium phosphate. It may also be fixed in acidic soils. Applying it in bands 2-3 cm away from the seed rows at a depth of 4 to 8 cm, can minimize reversion or fixation. This prevents it from coming into contact with a large mass of soil and thus getting fixed or reverted to less soluble form. In addition to phosphorus it contain 24% CaO and 11% S, besides a few micronutrients in traces. It can be applied to all crops with advantage and should be applied before or at the time of sowing or transplanting. It can be used to prepare fertilizer mixture with (NH,),SO,, NH,Cl, ammonium phosphate and K fertilizers. It should not be mixed with urea and CAN, because it is reverted to dicalcium phosphate on prolonged storage.

Triple SuPERPHOSPHATE (TSP)- It is a high-analysis and concentrated form of super phosphate produced by the action of phosphoric acid on rock phosphate. It should contain a minimum 46% of total P,O, and 42.5% water soluble P,O,. TSP is particularly useful in preparation of high-analysis fertilizer mixtures. At present this fertilizer is not produced in India and is imported.

Basic sLaG-— It is a by-product of steel industries and sometimes called Thomas slag. During manufacture of steel, the non-ferrous materials including P are removed and separated as slag. Its P content depends on the iron ore used. Basic slag obtained from Indian steel plants has a low content of P ranging from 3 to 8% and hence the material is not used muchas fertilizer. It is ground to a fine particle and used to neutralize soil acidity because it is rich in Ca and in this process considerable quantity of P is added to the soil.

Bone MEAL-— The raw bone meal is prepared by grinding untreated bones not larger than 2-5 mm size. Coarse size and fatty material in bones delay the release of P. It

should contain minimum 20% total P,O, out of which 8% should be citrate soluble and 3% N. The steamed bone meal is prepared by steaming under pressure to remove fat and improve its quality. It should contain minimum 22% total P,O,; out of which 16% should be citrate soluble. Bone meal should be applied to soil several weeks before sowing. In India, the use of bone meal has considerably decreased because of its high cost.

POTASSIC FERTILIZERS— In India two type K-fertilizer materials are commonly used, viz. (7) muriate of potash (potassium chloride, KCl) and (ii) potassium sulphate (K,SO,). Out of these, KCl is consumed in larger quantities i.e. 4.1 million tonnes compared with 0.04 million tonnes of K,SO |, during (2008-09). Natural deposits containing K salts are mined and purified to obtain these fertilizers. These natural salt deposits occur mostly in France, Canada, and the USA, and Russia. In India salts of K occur in Leh in Jammu and Kashmir, and Bikaner in Rajasthan, but are still to be examined for commercial exploitation.

MuriaTE OF POTASH- In pure form it is white crystalline KCI salt, but the colour of fertilizer-grade KCI ranges from white to red, depending on the impurities. It should contain minimum 60% K,O. KCI is completely soluble in water. On application to soil, K ion is adsorbed by soil colloid, and hence it is not lost by leaching, except in sandy soil. Being a neutral salt it does not produce any acidity or alkalinity. It can be applied to all crops, but its chlorine content may affect the quality of tobacco and potato crops. It can be safely used in fertilizer mixtures.

PoTASsIUM SULPHATE- It is white crystalline salt containing 48 to 52% K,O. Fertilizer grade should contain minimum of 50% K,O and 17.5% S by weight. Like KCI, it is a neutral salt. It is completely soluble in water and is applied before or at the time of sowing. Among the fertilizers, it is the least hygroscopic and possesses good physical properties and therefore it can be safely used in fertilizer mixtures as well as for tobacco and potato crop.

POTASSIUM SCHOENITE— The Central Salt and Marine Chemical Research Institute, Bhavnagar (Gujarat) has developed a process for the production of potassium schoenite (a double salt of potassium sulphate and magnesium phosphate) from solar evaporation of bitterns in saltpans. It contains 22 to 24% potash, and as impurity 8 to 10% magnesium oxide and 2 to 3% sodium chloride.

NON-CONVENTIONAL SOURCES OF POTASSIUM— Wood ashes, cattle dung ash, leaf mould, tobacco stems, banana leaves and water hyacinth are available as indigenous sources of K. Wood ash in the form of potassium carbonate contains 5 to 6% potash, | to 2% phosphate and 25 to 30% lime. Besides, there are fair amounts of potassium in the groundnut shell, paddy husk and bagasse ashes.

ComPLex FERTILIZERS— Complex fertilizers contain two or more plant nutrients, of which two major nutrients are in chemical combination. The advantages of complex fertilizers are (i) high total nutrient content (ii) low cost of packing, storage and transport per unit nutrient, (ii/) granulated, free-flowing, easy to apply and uniform in application. Owing to these advantages, the use of complex fertilizers is increasing and it is being produced in large quantities.

Ammonium phosphate—This is a group of fertilizers containing ammonium and phosphate groups in various proportions. Four types of ammonium phosphates are produced.

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 543

Ammonium phosphate sulphate— It is available in two grades, viz. 16-20—0 and 20-20-0. The grade 16—20-0 means that 100 kg of the material contains 16 kg N, 20 kg P,O,. Ammonium phosphate sulphate is a mixture of ammonium sulphate and ammonium phosphate produced by the reaction of ammonia with sulphuric acid and phosphoric acid.

Urea ammonium phosphate (24-—24-0, 28-28-0) — Itisa mixture of urea and ammonium phosphate.

Ammonium nitrate phosphate (23-23-0) — It is a mixture of ammonium phosphate and ammonium nitrate

Diammonium phosphate (18 —46 — 0) — It is produced from the reaction of ammonia and phosphoric acid.

These are granular fertilizers therefore the contact between soil and fertilizer particles is less. This helps in decreasing fixation of water-soluble P.

Nitro-phosphates — This fertilizer is produced from acidulation of rock phosphate and ammoniation of the resultant slurry. The final product contains ammonium nitrate, dicalcium phosphate, and mono-ammonium phosphate.

NPK COMPLEX FERTILIZERS — These are produced by adding potassium salt in the slurry of N-P complex fertilizers and then are granulated. Complex fertilizers are shown in Table 16.8e.

MIXED FERTILIZERS — In the physical mixture, the major problem is the segregation of different components, which takes place during transport and storage. This problem of segregation is overcome by granulating the product, which though costlier has several advantages. The following points should be taken care of in preparing the fertilizer mixtures.

1. The grade of the mixture refers the guaranteed minimum percentage of N, P,O, and K,O in the mixture.

2. Fertilizer ratio refers to the ratios of percentages of N, P,O, and K,O in the mixture.

3. Conditioners are added to fertilizer mixtures during their preparation for reducing hygroscopicity and improving their physical conditions.

4. Filler is a weight make up material added to the mixture to make it of desired grade, such as sand, soil, china clay, dolomites etc.

The choice of fertilizer materials to be used in mixtures depends on three main considerations, viz. (a) agronomic suitability, (b) desired fertilizer grade, and (c) physical and chemical properties.

However, several fertilizer materials are not physically or chemically compatible with each other, e.g. (a) ammonium sulphate cannot be mixed with basic slag and calcium carbonate, (b) calcium ammonium nitrate cannot be mixed with basic slag, (c) super phosphate cannot be mixed with calcium carbonate, rock phosphate and basic slag, and (d) ammonium phosphate cannot be mixed with basic slag, calcium carbonate and rock phosphate.

FERTILIZER MATERIALS THAT HELP REDUCE NITROGEN Loss— Appreciable quantity of N from the soil is lost through leaching and denitrification of nitrate and volatilization of ammonia. To reduce these losses two types of fertilizer materials are used, viz. (i) slow release nitrogenous fertilizers, and (ii) nitrification inhibitors.

SLOW RELEASE NITROGENOUS FERTILIZERS— These types of materials have been

developed, which release or permit in solution only small quantities of nitrogen at a time. These are of two types.

Chemicals — Which inherently have the capacity of releasing N slowly, e.g. (i) urea from a condensation product of urea and formaldehyde, (ii) isobutylene diurea, (iit) oxamide, (iv) crotonilidene diurea (CDU), and (v) guanil urea phosphate (GU).

Coated fertilizers — Fertilizers are coated with semi-permeable membrane or inert material, e.g. (i) S-coated urea, (i) neem-coated urea, (iii) urea-wax adduct, and (iv) lac-coated urea.

NITRIFICATION INHIBITORS — Nitrogen is usually lost from applied ammonium and amide containing fertilizers after their conversion to nitrate form. Inhibition or retardation of nitrification of applied ammonium and amide nitrogen can thus reduce these losses and increase the efficiency of applied N. Several chemicals having nitrification-inhibiting properties have been identified, such as (i) N-serve (2-chloro 6 (trichloromethyl pyridine), (i?) AM (2-amino-4-chloro-6 methyl-pyrimidine), (iii) thiourea, (iv) didin (dicyandiamide), (v) S.T 2 sulphathiazole, and (vi) calcium carbide coated urea.

MATERIALS CONTAINING SULPHUR, CALCIUM AND MAGNESIUM— Owing to intensive cropping practice, the deficiencies of S, Ca and Mg has been reported in Indian soils. About 25% of the total districts in the country, particularly in Bihar, Gujarat, Kerala, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Karnataka have shown S deficiency. About one-third of Indian soils are acidic, where Ca deficiency may be is generally a problem. Magnesium deficiency is a problem in the acid lateritic soils of Kerala, Malnad area of Karnataka, Nilgiris in Tamil Nadu, a part of Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab and Northeast India. In these soils the extent of crop response to the application of materials containing S, Ca and Mg is quite high.

There are a number of materials containing these three nutrients, but none of these has been included in Fertilizer Control Order. Table 16.10 shows different materials that can be used as sources of S, Ca and Mg.

Source: Fertilizer Statistics 2002-03. FAI, New Delhi.

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 545

MICRONUTRIENT FERTILIZERS AND GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS— Micronutrient fertilizers are classified into straight or single inorganic micronutrient carrier, chelates (organic complexes of single micronutrient element with synthetic chelates like EDTA), and fortified micronutrient fertilizers such as single micronutrient fertilizer or salt fortified with macronutrient fertilizer, and micronutrient mixtures containing more than one micronutrient element.

ZINC CARRIERS AND FERTILIZERS: The major Zn-containing fertilizers are ZnSO,.7H,O and ZnSO,.H,0O fertilizers which are water soluble, crystalline salts, and containing minimum 21.0 and 33.0% Zn respectively. It is manufactured from Zn metal or Zn ash, a by-product of galvanized industry and sulphuric acid. It is easy to handle and stores well under dry conditions. During the rainy season, these sometimes form lumps. It is very suitable for soil and top-dressing as well as foliar application to almost all the crops. According to the Micronutrient Association of India representing zinc sulphate manufactures, there are 173 registered units out of which 116 are in operation having about 200,000 mt annual production capacity. During the year 2007-08 about 80,000 mt of ZnSO , Was manufactured and 79,000 mt was distributed in the country: 24,980 in Punjab, 12,085 in Haryana, 14,403 in Uttar Pradesh, 2,425 in Rajasthan, 8,527 in Andhra Pradesh, 5,176 in Tamil Nadu, 212 in Madhya Pradesh, 2,955 in Gujarat, 2,421 in Maharashtra, 2,470 in Karnataka, 2,520 in West Bengal, 970 in Bihar, 295 in Himachal Pradesh, 427 in Uttarakhand, 133 in Chandigarh, 51 in Delhi, 32 in Chandigarh, and 44 mt in Asom; out of which about 60% is distributed in Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh states alone.

CuELaTEs— The term chelate is derived from the Greek word chelae-the claw of crab that traps its prey from all sides. Anomalous to this, the synthetic chelating agents or salts like ethylene diamine tetra acetic acid (EDTA), diethylene triamine penta acetic acid (DTPA), hydroxyethyl ethylene di-amine-tri-acetic acid (HEDTA), ethylene diamine di (o-hydroxypheny!) acetic acid (EDDHA), nitrilotriacetic acid (NTA) etc, having ring (claw)-like structure and negative charge that binds the positively charged nutrient cations: Zn?*, Cu?*, Fe’*, Mn**, etc. through covalent bonds in their ring; the process is termed as chelation. The binding energy of the chelating agent determines the strength with which the element is held in the ring, which determines the stability of the metal chelate or organo-metal-molecule vis-a-vis nutrient retention and release power of the chelating agent. The EDTA is most commonly used to produce chelated Zn, Fe, Mn and Cu micronutrient fertilizers, as it is cheaper than other chelating agents.

ZINC CHELATES— These are organic chelates or complexes of Zn with synthetic salt of ethylene diamine tetra acetic acid (EDTA) or other chelating agents. The Zn-EDTA is a free flowing crystalline or powder material which contains minimum of 12.0% Zn. On equivalent Zn basis, Zn-chelates are 2-3 times more effective but much costlier than the inorganic ZnSO, fertilizer. Therefore these are not widely used for foodgrain crops but are used for commercial fruits, vegetable and plantation crops. No data are available about their production and consumption for agricultural use.

ZINCATED UREA— Zinc is incorporated in or coated on macronutrient fertilizers to ensure uniform distribution of the micronutrient fertilizer in the field to minimize the cost of application. Urea fertilizer is fortified with Zn salt and contains minimum 2, 43 and 1.5% Zn, N and biuret respectively. It is manufactured to meet simultaneous requirement of N and Zn of crops when the recommended rates of N are applied

546 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

through this fortified material. It may be a mismatch to meet the Zn requirement of some soil-cropping systems. Besides this, Zn will find its application by default to soils not deficient in it along with urea for meeting N requirement of crops and farmers have to pay additional price for the same as the cost of fertilizers is now based on per unit of nutrient content in it. Such fertilizers should be prominently marked as “Only for Zn Deficient Soils and Crops”. All the above Zn carriers are included in the FCO as fertilizer. Zn carriers are inorganic salts or minerals such as zinc oxide (ZnO), 60- 80% Zn; ZnCl,, 9% Zn, ammonium phosphate, Zn(NH,)PO,, 37% Zn, sphelarite ZnS, 60% Zn, zinc dust, 99.5% Zn; organic chelates Na-Zn-HEDTA, 8% Zn, Na Zn-NTA, 13% Zn, natural-Zn-polyflavonoid, 10% Zn and Zn-lignin sulphonate, 5% Zn. These materials are not included in the FCO, and hence are not considered fertilizers.

Zinc fertilizers can be applied to the soil just before sowing as broadcast, and then mixed with plough while preparing the land for seeding or transplanting of crops or as band placement below or besides the seed with fertilizer-cum-seed drill. The soluble material can also be applied through 2-3 foliar applications, as per the recommendation for a particular crop or fruit trees, especially to the trees before spring flush of growth. Soil application is the best method. Depending upon the soil and crops, the rate of Zn application varies from 2.5 to 25 kgZn/ha and should be applied as per the recommendation or on soil-test basis. Where organic manures are applied the rates of Zn application can be reduced by 30 to 50%. The residual availability of initial soil- applied Zn last for 3 to 5 crops depending upon the soil type, cropping system and rate of Zn application.

TRON CARRIERS AND FERTILIZERS— The common carriers of iron are inorgnic salts ferrous sulphate (FeSO,.7H,0, fertilizer grade) 19.0% Fe, ferrous ammonium sulphate (NH,),SO,.FeSO ,-6H,O (14% Fe), and iron chelates such as Fe-EDTA (12% Fe, fertilizer grade), Fe-EDDHA (6.0% Fe), Fe-DTPA (10% Fe) and Fe-HEDTA (5.0—9.0% Fe). Fe- EDDHA is a better source than others for alkaline soils. Organic complexes are lignin sulphate (6% Fe), polyflavonoid (6.0-9.6% Fe) and Fe-frits (variable).

Generally foliar application of soluble carriers like ferrous sulphate is a better method than their soil application in large amounts. Polyflavonoids, phenols and lignosulphonates, the natural organic complexing agents are produced as by-products of wood pulp industry, they bind the cations as organo-metal-complex and form weak bonds than the chelating agents.

Compared with other micronutrients, Fe-deficiency is more difficult to correct. Ferrous sulphate fertilizer grade is cheaper and is commonly used to cure iron deficiency in crops. Due to its auto-oxidation under aerobic conditions, soil application in large amounts (50 to 100 kg/ha) has to be given and therefore it is not as effective and economical as foliar spray application. Three to four foliar sprays of 0.5 to 2% ferrous sulphate solution are recommended, depending upon the degree of Fe deficiency and succulent nature of the crop, lower concentration for succulent crops like maize and higher concentration for non-succulent crops like rice. Under severe Fe deficiency in rice upland or partially upland rice condition, in coarse textured soils organic manures including green manures along with foliar sprays of Fe are more effective in correcting Fe deficiency.

MANGANESE CARRIERS AND FERTILIZERS— The common Mn carriers that can supply Mn are inorganic salts such as manganese sulphate (MnSO,. 3H,O), 30.5% Mn

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 547

(fertilizer grade), manganous oxide (MnO) 41-68% Mn, manganese oxide (MnO,), 62% Mn, manganese chloride (MnCL) 17% Mn, chelates Mn- EDTA, 12% Mn, and Mn-frits, 10-25% Mn. Out of these only manganese sulphate is recognized as fertilizer in the FCO. Like Fe, auto-oxidation of Mn occurs under aerobic conditions, and hence large doses (50 to 100kg/ha) though often uneconomical, have to be applied to the soils to mitigate its deficiency. Foliar spray of 0.5 to 1.0% solution of MnSO, effectively and economically corrects its deficiency in field and fruit crops. In Punjab where Mn- deficiency in wheat on coarse-textured soils under rice-wheat system is a serious field- scale problem, three foliar sprays of MnSO, solution, one before first irrigation and the remaining two thereafter at an interval of 7 10 days, effectively cure Mn deficiency.

CopPER CARRIERS AND FERTILIZERS The common sources of Cu are inorganic salts such as copper sulphate (CuSO HO), 24% Cu (fertilizer grade) and (CuSO,.H,O), 35% Cu; cuprous oxide, Cu,O, 89% Cu; cupric oxide (CuO), 75% Cu; and chelate Cu-EDTA, 13% Cu. Out of these CuSO 5H,O is included as fertilizer in the FCO. Both soil application of 2-5 kg Cw/ha or foliar sprays 0.25-0.5% CuSO. 5H,O solution effectively combat Cu deficiency in field and fruit crops.

BORON CARRIERS AND FERTILIZERS— The common sources of boron are inorganic salts such as borax or sodium tetra-borate (Na,B,O,.10H,0 fertilizer grade, 10.5% B) for soil application and solubor (Na,B,O,.5H,0+ Na,B,O,.10H,O fertilizer grade, 19% B) for foliar spray. Both are included as fertilizer in the FCO. Other carriers are boric acid (H,BO,), 17% B, colemanite (Ca,B,O, ,.5H,O) 10-16% B, B-frits, 2-6% B. Boronated single ‘superphosphate (16% P,O,, 0.18% B powder) is also included in the FCO. Generally the B deficiency is more critical in highly calcareous soils, sandy leached soils, limed acid soils, reclaimed yellow or lateritic soils as well as in fruits and plantation crops. Soil application of 0.5 to 3.0 kg B/ha as borax may be considered high and low for more and less B-sensitive crops, respectively. Therefore B application rates need to be applied according to the crop requirements to avoid its toxic effects. Foliar sprays of 0.2 to 0.3% solution of solubor or boric acid effectively correct its deficiency.

MOLYBDENUM CARRIERS AND FERTILIZERS— Molybdenum sources include inorganic salts such as ammonium molybdate: (NH,),Mo,0,,.H,O, 52% Mo, included in the FCO as fertilizer, sodium molybdate (NaMoO,.2H. 0), 39. 5% Mo, molybdenite (MoS,) 60% Mo, and Mo-frits, 2-3% Mo. Molybdenum ‘defitiency generally occurs in acid soils but the extent and magnitude has not been assessed in the country. Soil application of 75-100 g/ha of foliar sprays of 0.1-0.3% solution or seed treatment (50-100 g salt/ ha as liquid or slurry) effectively cure its deficiency in most soils and crops.

Integrated nutrient supply and use systems

The organic and chemical fertilizers are described in the previous pages, the importance of integrated supply and use of nutrients from these is highlighted here.

Integrated nutrient supply, use or management systems (INM) involves efficient and judicious supply, use or management of all the major components of plant nutrient sources: chemical fertilizers in conjunction with animal manures, compost, green manures, legumes in cropping system, bio-fertilizers, crop residues,.or recyclable waste and other locally available nutrient sources for sustaining soil fertility, health and productivity. The integrated supply and use of plant nutrients from chemical fertilizers and organic manures has been shown to produce higher crop yields than when each is

applied alone. This increase in crop productivity results from their combined effect, the synergistic effect, that helps improve chemical, physical and biological properties of soil and consequently the soil organic matter and nutrient status; to large extent balanced nutrient supply to crops of cropping systems, and with no or minimal deleterious effect on environment if any. The basic objective of the integrated nutrient supply and management is to make, as far as possible, balanced nutrient supply to crop that maintains and also improves the soil fertility health for sustained high productivity on a long-term basis. As plant nutrient sources differ markedly in their nutrient contents, release efficiency or fixation, positional availability, crop specificity, farmers’ acceptability etc., their appropriate combination(s) to a production system for optimum and balance nutrient supply depends on the land use, ecological, social and economic conditions.

Fertilizers and manures are the king pins of improved technology contributing about 50 to 60% increase in productivity of foodgrains in India, irrespective of soil and agro-ecological zone. But without an integrated supply and use of plant nutrients from chemical fertilizers and organic sources, increased production is not possible. The HYYV produce dramatic increases in yields through conversion of chemical energy of fertilizers and manures into biomass with higher grain: straw ratio. For the land-short countries like India, use of fertilizers provide the best strategy for land saving. But for this strategy, it would have required to put about 2—3 times more area under cereals to produce the same quantity of foodgrains. .

results of large number of long-term experiments clearly show that even recommended rates of NPK application, based on soil test basis, the yield of crops or of the cropping systems could not be maintained at high level continuously; the deficiency of S and or Zn or Fe or Mn or B started emerging and limiting crop yield after different periods. In soils of low pH, Alfisols of Palampur and Ranchi, the use of N fertilizer alone reduced the pH of the soil further and adversely affected the crop yields due to deficiency of Ca and toxicity of Al. The high yield could not be sustained without liming or farmyard manure application. At many other sites application of N alone even aggravated the deficiency of P and K that reduced crop yields. The deficiency of K became a limiting factor within a few years where N and P were applied alone. The soil analysis from these sites clearly show that the unbalanced use of fertilizer over a long period leads to emergence of deficiency of one or the another plant nutrients not included in the fertilizer schedule as these nutrient got depleted from the soils with higher biomass harvest under intensive agriculture. However, the yields of crops considerably improved where application of 10-15 tonnes farmyard manure/ha along with recommended rates of NPK were applied. This emphasizes the necessity of an integrated nutrient supply and use with a harmonious combination of chemical fertilizers, organic manures and bio-fertilizers to maximize nutrient use efficiency and minimize their losses and leakage to achieve the goals of improving and sustaining (a) soil fertility vis-a-vis factor productivity, (b) soil, water and air quality; and (c) socio-economic conditions of the farmers. Nevertheless, there is no assurance that even with a combined application of N, P and K fertilizers and organic manures, some of the micronutrients will not become the yield-limiting factors after sometime, as even organic manures may not be able to provide all the micronutrients in amounts

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 549

The importance and contributions of the integrated nutrient use from each of its components is discussed here.

Chemical fertilizers

Plant nutrient supply from the chemical fertilizers is the key to increasing agricultural production by enhancing the land productivity. It is also a means for land saving which is becoming a limiting factor in countries like India where man to land ratio is widening and demand for food, fuel and fiber is increasing. It is impossible for India or any other country to increase its agricultural production without increasing the use of nutrients from the chemical fertilizers. The poor agricultural productivity in the country is due to low consumption of chemical fertilizers. The fertilizer (NPK) consumption during 2005 in India was far less 119 kg/ha as compared to 300 kg/ha in China, 625 kg/ha in Egypt and 666 kg/ha in the Netherlands. Thus the future of productive and sustainable agriculture lies in increasing the amount and integrated supply and use of nutrients from inorganic (chemical fertilizers), organic and biological resources and as well enhancing their use efficiency. At present there is a big gap of 10 million tonnes of nutrients annually added and drained from the soil by crop removal and erosion. There is a need to develop strategies to bridge this gap particularly in the intensively cultivated areas where the soils are rapidly exhausting. The best remedy for this is to adopt integrated nutrient supply and use or management systems.

Chemical fertilizers are and will remain the major and very important component of the integrated nutrient supply and management systems under intensive cropping as these contribute nearly 50% to the increase in crop yield. The National Academy of Agricultural Sciences, India, has estimated that for meeting the food needs of India’s increased population by 2025, India may have to increase its plant nutrient supply over 45 million tonnes from the current level of 25.0 million tonnes in 2008-09 through NPK fertilizers and 4-6 million tonnes through organic manures. Out of this, 35 million tonnes should come from the chemical fertilizers sources and the rest 10 million tonnes from organic sources. Population pressure and attainment of the goal of self-sufficiency in foodgrains production have made it imperative to base our agriculture on more and more use of plant nutrients from chemical fertilizers. But for high sustainable productivity, integrated plant nutrient supply and use assumes the highest priority. As the chemical fertilizers are the purchased inputs, the cost of production is continuously increasing with increase in the cost of raw materials and energy as the concern of sharp hike in the prices of fossil fuel being globally felt. Also import of fertilizer largely of potassium due to inadequate domestic production and non-availability of resources, low fertilizer use efficiency 30 to 40%, emergence of S and micronutrient deficiencies due to use of high analysis fertilizers devoid of these nutrient and their large off-take by exhaustive production systems from the infinite soil resource underlines the crucial role of integrated use of organics and bio-fertilizers with chemical fertilizers to enhance and improve the nutrient supply and use efficiency, productivity and economy.

Integrated use of organic manures

We have ignored the exploitation of the potential of organic manures, composts, crop residues and agricultural wastes and their synergistic effect with chemical

fertilizers for increasing balance nutrient supply and their use efficiency for increasing productivity, sustainability of agriculture and improving soil health/quality and environment security. Thus all out efforts need to be made to mop up all the locally available organic resources and recycle the nutrients from these efficiently. This has not received the attention, as it deserves, therefore incentives and infrastructure need to be developed to efficiently tap these resources from both rural and urban areas. Nevertheless, it must be kept in mind that these resources can only partially save the chemical fertilizers and cannot meet the entire plant nutrient need for harnessing high crop yield under intensive agriculture production systems.

Farmyard manure (FYM) and compost

traditionally important sources especially and organic matter, besides being source of P, K, S and micronutrients in crop production. The potential of rural and urban composts is about 600 and 16 million tonnes, respectively, out of which only 233-289 was actually produced during the period 1987- 88 to 1995-96 and thereafter 133 -146 million tonnes in 1996-97 to 2004-05, this means that now only about one tonne/ha/year is available for use for agriculture. Furthermore, sizeable amount of nutrients are lost due to improper storage, handling and incorporation techniques. Also less than 50% of the manurial potential of livestock population is utilized in crop production and large proportion is used as fuel and lost as droppings on non-agricultural lands. Results of several field experiments have clearly shown that part of fertilizers, 25-50% requirement of rainy season (kharif) crops and about 25% of the winter (rabi) crops can be easily saved through integrated use of farmyard manure (equivalent to 25 to 50% N) with fertilizer N in different cropping systems without causing any adverse effects on the total productivity. Also residual effect of the manure applied to rice on the succeeding wheat crop, equivalent to 30 kg fertilizer N and 30 kg P,O./ha was observed in the rice-wheat system. Similarly, integrated use of 4 tonnes of poultry manure/ha with 60 kg fertilizer N/ha produced rice yield equivalent to that obtained with 120 kg N/ha from urea. The beneficial effects of integrated supply and use of nutrients from organic and inorganic sources are more spectacular in the alkali/sodic and acidic soils. Similarly, results of more than 300 on-farm trials in 9 districts across seven states on different rainfed oilseed- based cropping systems for 3 years revealed that use of INM involving different sources of organic manure gaye maximum yield and income. Application of FYM in soybean- chickpea system and in fallow-sunflower system; lime along with FYM in groundnut pigeonpea intercropping system; green manure in safflower, castor and mustard proved beneficial in increasing yield and income over farmers practice as well as recommended doses of NPK Integrated use of farmyard manure with recommended levels of NPK. fertilizers maintained the soil organic matter status and improved the available status of secondary and micronutrients besides physical properties like bulk density, aggregate stability, water retention and hydraulic conductivity and microbial population of Azotobacter over the fertilizer application alone.

Green manuring

Green manures and cultivation of legume in a cropping system is a time-honoured practice for augmenting the N supply. The green manuring practice not only improves N economy but also has many other beneficial effects on soil health/quality. Integrated

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 551

use of green manure and chemical fertilizers saves 50 to 75% fertilizer N in rice; for better results timing of fertilizer N application need to be appropriately changed, a dose of fertilizer N can be omitted at transplanting of rice. In some rice-growing areas, on an average, 30-40 kg fertilizer N equivalent can be considered as optimum contribution from green manuring.

Green manure of Sesbania, sunnhemp and cowpea having narrow C:N ratio when incorporated before transplanting rice or 7 to 15 days before seeding of uplands crops contribute sizeable amounts of plant nutrients, particularly N. Green manure influences availability of the nutrients through its favourable effects on oxidation-reduction regime, pH and increased chelation capacity. For example, in coarse-textured soils dhaincha green manure corrected more effectively the Fe deficiency in rice than the soil application of iron fertilizer. Integrated use of green manure with recommended levels of NPK fertilizers benefited both the crops and increased the total productivity of rice-wheat system by 20% at Ludhiana, and 8% at Kanpur, 18% of maize—wheat at Siruguppa and 5% of pearl millet-wheat at Bichpuri. Green manuring of 45 days old cowpea along with 60 kg N/ha gave consistently higher yield of rice as well as of the succeeding wheat by 270 to 430 kg/ha due to residual effect. In amended sodic soils at Karnal and Kanpur, green manuring along with chemical fertilizers increased rice yield to a level that was not achievable with fertilizer alone. The age of 45-60 days of green manure and its incorporation one to seven days before transplanting of rice are superior to its incorporation later on.

Legume intercropping and residues incorporation

Growing legumes in rotation and incorporation of legume residues after picking of pods also significantly improve the yield of cereal crop in the rotation. Crops like sugarcane, maize, grain sorghum accrue benefits from this practice. Incorporation of summer greengram residues after picking pods increased rice yield and economized 60 kg N/ha under rice-wheat system.

Crop residue and recyclable waste

Crop residues: About one-third of the crop residues are available for utilization in agricultural production. On an average 25% of N and P, 50% of S and 75% of K is retained in the cereal residues making them valuable nutrient sources. Their long- term use for 11 years increased organic matter and total N content and available P and K content of soil. Beneficial effect of incorporation of 5 tonnes wheat straw/ha along with fertilizers on the yield of groundnut pods is reported. Crop residues of wider C.: N ratio cause immobilization of available N and P that leads to adverse effect on the crop growth. These materials should be supplemented with a part of N fertilizers recommended for the succeeding crop at the time of their application. It is shown that 2-4 mg N could be fixed by hetrotrophic microorganisms per gram of straw added in flooded soils could fix 2-4 mg N. Sowing of Sesbania green manure in combined harvest of wheat or spreading the crop residues/straw between the rows of green manure, two weeks after its sowing and then their incorporation, is helpful to check immobilization of nitrogen. Also application of farmyard manure enhances the decomposition of crop residues and values of its manure for integrated use with chemical fertilizers.

Press mud: Use of sulphitation press mud, the recyclable waste of sugar industry, along with fertilizers increases cane yield and substitutes about 25% of the fertilizer equivalent N. For better manurial value, well decomposed press mud need to be prepared and used.

Potato haulms and sugarcane trash: About 10 million tonnes of potato haulms that contain 2.5% of N are available and their integrated use with chemical fertilizers can save about 45 kg fertilizer N/ha and an increase of 5 tonnes/ha sugarcane yield. Also integrated use of 5 tonnes sugarcane trash/ha with fertilizers increased the cane yield and saved nearly 75 kg fertilizer N/ha, besides improving the soil organic matter status.

Biofertilizers

Rhizobium, Azospirillum and Azotobacter: The Rhizobium-legume symbiosis could meet more than 80% N needs of legume crops and increase the yield of pulse crops by 10-15%. Biofertilizers have been developed for large number of vegetable crops. And their use enhanced 8-21% yield of aboveground crops and 25-50% yield of underground crops as well as increased nutrient-use efficiency by 12-36% of N, 18- 29% of P, 9-15% of K and 16-18% of S (AINP on Biofertilizers Res. Report, 2004— 07, IISS, Bhopal). Inoculation of seeds with efficient strains of Azospirillum and Azotobacter contributes about 15—20 kg fertilizer equivalent N/ha in different crops. However, responses to biofertilizers are so far highly inconsistent, besides being environmental, crop and management specific. The antagonism between these and the native microorganisms limit their effectiveness and adoption.

Mixed consortium biofertilization

Recently mixed biofertilizers (BIOMIX) are being used. These contain a consortium of N fixers, P solubilizers and PGPR (plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria) and has been found to promote the growth of cereals, legumes and oilseeds better than their individual application. In Tamil Nadu, inoculation of consortia of Azospirillum, PSB and PGPR on rice (var. Whiteponni) and application of NP at the rate of 75% of recommended dose of fertilizer (RDF) recorded 13% higher grain yield over 100% NP thus saving 25% NP. In Andhra Pradesh mixed consortia of Rhizobium, RBG 314 and PSB, AMT 1001 and Pseudomonas (PF) ehanced 40% yield of blackgram (var. LBG 20). Also Azospirillum strains have been developed and inoculated on chilli which yielded 25% and 30% more yield over 100 and 75% RDF respectively. In Vertisols of Maharashtra, inoculation of Azotobacter and PSB on blackgram, soybean and pigeonpea increased the seed yields significantly by 150-250 kg/ha over control and even over 100% RDF. In field pea,Rhizobium + 60% N increased pod yield by 42% and was par with 100% N thereby saved 40% N (AINP on Biofertilizers Res. Report, 2004-07 LSS, Bhopal).

More than 90% area under pulses and 75% area under oilseed are rain-fed. Recently 60 on-farm trails on INM in chickpea and lentil in Raisen, Bhopal, Rewa and Satna districts of Madhya Pradesh have not only resulted in higher yields but also saved fertilizer cost. Application of 75% NPK + 25 tonnes FYM + seed inoculation with Rhizobium + 3 kg PSB/ ha to soybean and 50-75% of the RDF to chickpea and lentil produced 12-25% more chickpea and 15-28% more lentil yield as compared to recommended NPK fertilizer application.

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 553

Blue green algae and Azolla: These are more relevant to rice cultivation. The results are though very erratic, under good management systems their contribution seldom exceeds 20-40 kg/ha fertilizer equivalent N and needs to be harnessed in area where fertilizer use is low.

Phosphate solubilizing bacteria (PSB): Integrated use of P solubilizing bacteria with low-grade rock phosphate contributes about 30-35 kg P,O,/ha in neutral to slightly alkaline soils. . _

Vermicompost, sewage manures and biogas byproduct slurry: Their production and integrated use with chemical fertilizers needs to be encouraged through appropriate incentives and strategies, as these are potential sources of nutrients available to agriculture.

Models of integrated nutrient use or management for different well-defined agro- ecological zones and cropping systems need to be developed to provide guidance for rational, integrated and efficient supply and use of nutrient resources. Strategies are also required to prepare and distribute bulk sources of nutrients after enriching these with chemical fertilizers and reducing their bulk employing modern technology.

ORGANIC FARMING

Background objectives: Before the advent of agrochemicals, most the world was produced organically using organic manures, animal and human power. By middle of the 19th century, manufacture of superphosphate fertilizer was started in England followed by discovery of ammonia synthesis process that leads to the manufacture of N fertilizers in Europe and USA. The first tractor was developed in the USA in 1910. The DDT and BHC insecticides were discovered in 1939. Nitro- phenols herbicides were developed in 1933 followed by the development of 2, 4-D and MCPA in 1940s. Thus by the middle of the 20th century, most of the components of modern agriculture, i.e. tractors and associated farm machines, fertilizers, agrochemicals were in use on agricultural farms in the developed countries. In order to eliminate hunger and poverty from the underdeveloped countries, modern agriculture with all its components has been used and the efforts are going on to develop still better modern agricultural tools and technologies to further boost food production. The use of such tools and technologies has been helping India to achieve goals of agricultural production, even after the Green Revolution in the mid 1960s, which are exemplary and are the results of the increased use of the components of modern agriculture namely fertilizer, pesticides, herbicides, HYV, farm machinery, irrigation etc. As a result foodgrains production of the country increased more than two times during the post green revolution period from 1967 onwards and consequently improved economy and welfare of the people.

Nevertheless, unscientific overuse of pesticides, especially in vegetables and fruits at certain farms or orchards, resulted in accumulation of residues above the safety levels, and this brought to attention the ill effects of modern agriculture. Similarly, the ill-effects of unbalanced and unscientific overuse of fertilizers N have been recognized in developed countries. These created fears of health hazard in the people, especially in the European Union, USA, Canada, Australia, Japan etc. and the resultant demand for foods have grown without pesticides and chemical fertilizers. This focused the attention of food producers to adopt organic farming. The formation of International

Federation of Organic Agriculture Movement (IFOAM) in 1972, gave an international framework for discussion and condition of internationally recognized principles of organic farming. During the last few years, organic farming has catched up because of the increased consumer awareness regarding food safety and their health issues, increase in demand for organically grown food and environmental concerns. Organic farming systems are now increasingly adopted in western countries especially highly developed—European Union, North America, Canada, Australia, Japan etc.

The objectives of organic farming are to produce healthy and safe foods and by adopting organic methods of production and safe methods of processing, those strictly in accordance with the internationally recognized principles. These require the farmers to consider the effect that their activities will have on the future of agriculture and how the systems they employ shape the environment. As a consequence, farmers, consumers and policy makers have to play an important role in organic farming.

Definition: Organic farming involves the use of renewable resources and recycling, returning to the soil the nutrients found in waste products. Organic farming respects the environment’s own system for controlling pests and diseases in raising crops and livestock without the use of synthetic pesticides, herbicides, chemical fertilizers, growth hormones, antibiotics or gene manipulation. Also meat and poultry production is regulated with particular concern for animal welfare and by using natural foodstuffs. Thus, organic farming differs from modern intensive farming systems wherein farmers use a range of techniques that help sustain ecosystems and reduce pollution.

Promotion, certification and inspection

Promotion: In the country, National Steering Committee, Ministry of Commerce, Government of India and APEDA are the agencies that promote organic farming.

Certification: Organic farms and the producers require certification, as in the developed countries, from the accredited agencies, like IFOAM, Coffee Board, Tea Board, Spices Board, Coconut Development Board, and Directorate of Cashew and Cocoa. The APEDA is the coordinating agency for organic production and export under the brand name “Indian Organic”. The steps involved for certification are: registration of farms/producers and the processing industries/units, provision of basic information on the crop and the farm, inspection and verification of the field and processing units, inspection of production methods and processing units by the inspector(s) of the certifying agency. The farm producing the organic foods is not allowed to use agrochemicals and inorganic fertilizers for 2-3 years before which the produce can be marketed. Also the standards for organic farming are very strict regarding the use of organic materials—manures, composts, crop residues etc., animal feed or fodder, soil amendments and minerals, and quality of surface irrigation and underground water used for production and agricultural practices adopted at the adjoining farms or area.

Inspection: This covers all stages in the production process, including storage, processing and packing. Farm inspections are carried out at least once a year and spot checks are also undertaken. Sanctions for infringements of any of the rules include instant removal of the right to claim organic status for the product concerned, with Stricter penalties imposed for more serious breaches. Meticulous record keeping is

SOIL FERTILITY, FERTILIZERS AND INTEGRATED NUTRIENTS USE 555

required, including, for livestock farmers and complete records of their livestock management systems. These assist policy-makers by indicating trends and pinpointing the risks and opportunities in agricultural activity, they also provide evidence for consumer groups seeking accurate information about the production and processing of foods for which they have to pay premium price. Thus stringent regulation covering production and quality are necessary besides measures to prevent fraudulent claims to organic status.

Seed and vegetative material: For organic farming, the farmers have to use only organically produced seed and vegetative materials. If there is no such material available, the farmer can ask the inspection body for a derogation to use non-organically produced seeds.

Area, market and scope: During the last few years, organically produced agricultural products have received worldwide attention because of their multi-billion trades and handsome profit to all involved in the business.

The global market for organically produced foods during 2003 was estimated at US $ 26 billion (Bhattcharya and Geholt. 2003. Fertiliser News, 49, 33-38), and now approached to around $38.6 billion and further expected to reach 102 billion US $ by 2020. During 2003 organic farming was practised only on 5% of the cultivated area of the world. India has the least (0.03) and the Austria the highest (11.3) percentage. Currently, about 30.4 million hectares area is under organic farming worldwide. The area under organic farming in India has expanded over seven-fold from 73,000 hectares in the last five years in 2003 to nearly 538,000 hectares in 2007-08. Also the exports of organically produced products have surged over four-fold to touch Rs 300 crores, up from just around Rs 73 crore in 2003 according to the International Competent Centre for Organic Agriculture (ICCOA), an organization of the stakeholders in the organic cultivation and product marketing business. It projects the organic sector to grow 6-7 times in the next five years as a result of the rapidly increasing demand for health-friendly organic products, which normally enjoy a price premium of 30-40% over the normal products. Asom was declared the ‘Organic State of the Year at the recently concluded India Organic Trade Fair, 2008, at the IARI, New Delhi (ICCOA, APFEDA, IOFA).

Though organic farming has been in vogue in different parts of the world for over two decades now, there have been no systematic studies to compare organic systems of farming with conventional cultivation in terms of productivity, product quality and cost of cultivation. Recently a long-term field experiment on 100% organic (ORG), 100% inorganic (INORG) and 50-50% ORG-INORG (integrated ORG-INORG, ie. INM) farming system for four crop rotations of soybean-wheat, soybean-mustard, soybean-chickpea, soybean-isabol initiated in 2004 revealed that in ORG system there was 5.3-7.8% reduction in seed yield of soybean during the first two years as compared to INORG or INM systems. But from third year onwards ORG as compared to INORG and INM more yield and it became 9.4-20.7% more in the Sth year. However, there was non-significant effect of these systems on seed yield of wheat, mustard and chickpea. The protein, oil, and methionine contents of soybean seed were better in ORG and INM than INORG system, while there was no effect on ash, cysteine and tryptophane content. These systems have no effect on the quality of rabi crops (JSS Annual report 2007-08, IISS Newsletter 11(2), 2008).

Largely, organic cotton, basmati rice and sesame have been exported. This points out the ample scope for adopting organic farming in areas where it is possible and economical to the farmers and the nation. In this direction, the National Commission on Farmers, GOI, has suggested to take up organic farming as a challenging task and as a thrust area of the X Five-Year Plan. Organic farming needs to be given a boost in the rainfed areas and in the Northeastern states where the use of agrochemicals is the least. Madhya Pradesh has already given the lead followed by Uttarakhand who has declared itself as an organic state. The benefits of organic farming are that it provides opportunities to contribute to vibrant rural economies through sustainable development. That is new employment opportunities in farming, processing and related services. Organic farming, once seen merely as a fringe interest serving a niche market, has come to the fore as an agricultural approach that cannot only produce safe food but is environmentally sound too.

Food quality and guarantee: Now rich or affordable consumers are willing to pay higher prices in return for guarantees relating to food safety and quality. As a result organically produced foods that were once difficult to obtain in other than selected specialist outlets and local markets, now these are more readily and with wide range of products are available in major supermarket chains across developed countries. The growing consumer market is thus one of the main driving forces encouraging farmers to shift to or adopt organic farming food production systems.

Myths and concerns: There is no doubt that continuous use of organic manures improves soil chemical, physical and biological properties and the supply of all the essential plant nutrients—the components of soil fertility and productivity. But the supply of macronutrients and of some micronutrients from these may not be adequate and fast as from chemical fertilizers to meet the requirements of plant and therefore will affect crop yields and food production of the organic farm or of the nation if practised on a large scale. But as long as organic farming is more economical, because its produce fetches premium price in the local and the export market, it will be adopted by the farmers. The myths such as better quality, nutritive value and taste of the organically verses inorganically produced foods have not been yet scientifically established and are therefore argued. Whatever the facts may be, currently there is an increasing demand for the organically produced food despite the facts they are quite costly. Therefore under commercial agriculture regime, everyone would like to avail the opportunity to benefit from it. But it is natural that the demand for the organic produce and competitive prices at the national and at international levels for the same will determine the area and the crops that can be brought economically under organic farming by a country having an advantage for the same. Nevertheless, it will not be possible for a country to afford to bring all the area under organic farming as it will adversely affect food production leading to increase in the poverty and malnutrition due to non-availability of food in the needed quantity and at the reasonable price that the masses can afford in the developing country like India. In this context, it will be relevant to quote Nobel Laureate Dr Norman Borlaug who said, “Switching on food production to organic would lower crop yields. We can use all the organic that is available but we are not going to feed six billion people with organic fertilizer or