SOURCE_DOCUMENT: Chapter 33.pdf

33. Oilseed Crops

India is among the largest vegetable oil economies in the world next only to USA, China, Brazil and Argentina. In the agricultural economy of India, oilseeds are important next only to foodgrains in terms of hectarage, production and value. Currently, India accounts for about 12-15% of world’s oilseeds area and 7-8% of world’s oilseeds output and 9-10% of world’s edible oils consumption. The diverse agro-ecological conditions in the country are favourable for growing all the nine annual oilseeds, which include seven edible oilseeds, viz. groundnut, rapeseed-mustard, soybean, sunflower, sesame, safflower and niger, and two non-edible sources, viz. castor and linseed. Apart from this, a wide range of other minor oilseeds of horticultural and forest origin, including in particular coconut and oilpalm are grown in the country. The country ranks first in the world in the production of castor, safflower, sesame and niger and second in groundnut and rapeseed-mustard, third in linseed and fifth in soybean and sunflower. Oilseeds occupy about 13-14% of gross cropped area and account for nearly 1.4% of gross national product and 7% of the value of all agricultural commodities. About 14 million farmers are engaged in the production of oilseeds and another million in their processing.

Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh account for nearly 90% of oilseeds area and production in the country. Among different oilseeds, groundnut, rapeseed-mustard and soybean account for nearly 79% of oilseeds area and 87% of oilseeds production in the country (2007-08).

When the country’s agricultural scenario was undergoing a rapid transformation leading to impressive performance on the food front in 60’s and 70’s, the oilseeds scenario, however, presented a dismal contrast. In order to increase the domestic production of oilseeds and reduce the import bill and make the country self-reliant in vegetable oils, the Government of India had launched the Technology Mission on Oilseeds (TMO) in May 1986. This mission, together with research achievements through the establishment of All-India Co-ordinated Research Project on Oilseeds in 1967 and later creation of the Directorate of Oilseeds Research, National Research Centres for Groundnut, Soybean and Rapeseed-Mustard helped to achieve the “Yellow Revolution”. As a consequence, the production of total oilseeds more than doubled by mid 1990s (23 million tonnes) as compared to mid 1980s (11 million tonnes) with additional area of around 8 million hectares and more than 40% increase in productivity. India changed from net importer in the 1980s to a net exporter status during the early 1990s. Again, it is back to net importer status necessitating the import of more than 40% of its annual edible oil needs. The main contributors to such transformation up to early nineties have been (i) availability of improved oilseeds production technology and its adoption, (ii) expansion in cultivated area, (iii) price support policy and (iv) institutional support through TMO. This was further facilitated by a relatively protectionist umbrella of higher import duties on the import of edible oil of the order

1121

OILSEED CROPS

of 65% on palmolein, the commonly imported oil. After near stagnation in oilseed production during 2000 to 2005, there was marked improvement in the last two years leading to record production of 29.75 million tonnes during 2007-08 with a productivity level of 1,115 kg/ha. The oilseed sector also became a net earner of foreign exchange for the first time during the last 10 years when the export earnings (Rs 12,875 crores) were higher than the import cost (Rs 11,147 crores) during 2007-08.

GROUNDNUT

Groundnut (Arachis hypogaea) is believed to be a native of Brazil (South America), since many closely related species are found there. The crop spread from Brazil to Peru, Argentina and Ghana, from where it was introduced into Jamaica, Cuba and other West Indies islands. The plant was introduced by the Portuguese into Africa from where it was introduced into North America. It was then transported along with the American West Coast to Mexico and then across the Pacific to the Philippines, from where it spread to China, India, Malaysia and Indonesia. In India, groundnut first reached on the east coast of the then Madras province. As per the available records it was first cultivated in Mysore state around 1800 ap.

The groundnut seed oil content varies from 44 to 50%, depending upon the varieties and agronomic conditions. Its oil finds extensive use as a cooking medium, both as refined oil and vanaspati ghee. It is also used in soap making, and in manufacture of cosmetics, lubricants, olein, stearin and their salts. Kernels are also eaten raw, roasted or sweetened. They are rich in protein and vitamins A, B and some members of the B, group. Their calorific value is 349 per 100 g. The Hand Picked and Selected (HPS) type of groundnut kernels are exported to other countries. The residual oilcake contains 7 to 8% N, 1.5% PO, and 1.2% K,O and can be used as a manure. It is an important protein supplement in cattle and poultry rations. It is also consumed as a confectionery product. The cake can be used for manufacturing artificial fibre. The haulms (plant stalks) are fed (green, dried or silaged) to livestock. Groundnut shell is used as fuel for manufacturing coarse boards, cork substitutes, etc. Groundnut is also of value as a rotation crop. Being a legume with root nodules, it can fix atmospheric nitrogen and thereby improve soil fertility.

Groundnut (Arachis hypogaea) is a member of the sub-family, Papilionaceae of the family Leguminosae. It consists of two subspecies, each containing two botanical varieties.

Subspecies hypogaea

Variety hypogaea (the Virginia group)

Variety hirsuta

Variety fastigiata (the Valencia group)

Variety vulgaris (the Spanish group)

Plants of the botanical variety hypogaea are spreading (runner) to upright (erect bunch) in growth habit, have alternate (vegetative and reproductive) branching, lack inflorescences on the main stem, possess appreciable fresh seed dormancy, flowers longer and matures later than those of subspecies fastigiata. Variety hirsuta has been used only to a little extent, world wide.

1122

Plants of the subspecies fastigiata are upright, have sequential reproductive branching and bear inflorescences in the main-stem leaf axils, possess little fresh seed dormancy, and are of shorter duration than those of the subspecies hypogaea. Subspecies Jastigiata includes both Spanish and Valencia types.

Groundnut, in general, is a short-statured plant, with the main axis being upright (15 to 40 cm long) but the major part of the plant consists of the primary branches. Secondary and tertiary branches are found in the semi-spreading and spreading (Virginia) types, giving them a prostrate stature. The leaves are alternate, stipulate and quadri-foliate. The flowers are orange yellow, typically papilionaceous, with a long clayx tube within which is held the style borne on a superior ovary. The clayx and corolla lobes are borne at the top of the hypanthium (clayx tube). The flowers are borne in the axils of the leaves on the fruiting branches. They are bisexual, zygomorphic, complete and sessile. Petals are five, with one large standard, two wings and two fused keel petals. There are two sterile and eight fertile anthers, four of which are globose and four oblong (dimorphic).

Groundnut is predominantly a self-pollinated crop and pollination takes place early in the morning. As soon as the fertilization is complete, the flowers fade. After fertilization, an intercalary meristem becomes active at the base of the ovary, above the point of attachment of the hypanthium, producing new tissue below itself and resulting in an elongated stalk — the peg. The pegs are positively geotropic, enter the soil and bend in a horizontal plane. Generally two, and occasionally one, three or four fertilized ovules are borné at the tip of the peg which later swells to become the pod. At maturity, the keels are contained within this pod. The testa is generally pink, but varieties with red, white, purple and blotched testa, with various gradations of colours are available.

Distribution, area and production

The total world groundnut production is about 47.77 million tonnes from 22.23 million hectares (2006). The major groundnut-producing countries of the world are China, India, Nigeria, USA, Indonesia, Argentina, Sudan, Senegal and Myanmar. With 6.29 million hectares and 9.18 million tonnes of nuts in shell, India shares 28 and 19% of world’s groundnut area and production (2007-08). Nearly 81% of the area and 84% of the production are concentrated in the four states, viz. Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. The other groundnut producing states are Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh. In India, the annual compound growth rate of groundnut area, production and productivity has been 0.42, 1.21 and 0.78%, respectively, between 1950-51 and 2006-07.

Climate and soil

Groundnut is grown throughout the tropics and its cultivation is also extended to the subtropical countries, lying between 45°N and 35°S, and up to an altitude of 1,000 metres. The crop can be grown successfully in places receiving a minimum rainfall of 500 mm and a maximum of 1,250 mm. The rainfall should be well-distributed during the flowering and pegging stages of the crop. The amount of rainfall required for presowing operations (preparatory cultivation) is 100 mm; for sowing it is 150 mm and for flowering and pod development an evenly distributed rainfall of 400-500 mm

1123

is required. The groundnut crop, however, cannot stand frost, long and severe drought or water stagnation.

Although groundnut is grown on a wide variety of soil types, the crop does best cn sandy-loam and loamy soils and also in black soils with good drainage. Heavy and stiff clays are unsuitable for groundnut cultivation as the pod development is hampered in these soils.

Cropping systems

Generally, most of the rainy season (kharif) groundnut is grown as a monocrop year after year. In certain places, it is rotated with wheat, sorghum, pearl millet, chickpea, castor, rice and cotton and in some areas with garden crops, such as potatoes, onions, chillies, garlic, ginger and turmeric (Table 33.1). The yields of cereal crops, following groundnut are usually increased by about 25%.

Intercropping

Short stature of groundnut makes it ideally suited for intercropping. It is estimated that about 25% of area under rainfed groundnut is under intercropping. In this, 1-6 rows of groundnut are intercropped with 1-3 rows of other companion crops (Table 33.2).

1124

1124 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

Season

Groundnut is raised mostly as a rainfed kharif crop, being sown from May to July, depending upon the monsoon rains. In winter (rabi), groundnut is sown in the southern states during November-December, mostly in the rice fallows. Summer groundnut is raised in the states of Gujarat, Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh, which is sown during the second fortnight of January up to the first fortnight of February.

1125

OILSEED CROPS

Cultivation

Tillage and seed-bed preparation: Seed-bed preparation depends upon soil type, rainfall pattern and the cropping system. For a kharif crop, with the onset of rains in May-June, the field is given two ploughings and the soil is pulverized well to obtain a good tilth. The third ploughing may be given just before sowing. When the soils are heavily infested with perennial weeds such as Cynodon or Cyperus, very deep ploughing is needed. If the field is infested with white grubs, treat the soil with Phorate 10 g @ 25 kg/ha before final harrowings. In rabi, ploughing should be done only when the soil has dried to the optimum moisture level so as to avoid a cloddy seed-bed.

Varieties: As the yield can be increased by 20% with the use of high-yielding varieties, the recommended varieties should be grown (Table 33.3).

Sowing time: Virginia types have dormant seeds which usually require a resting

period of 60-75 days. Dormancy can also be broken by exposing the seeds to Ethrel solution of 500 ppm. Bunch types can be used immediately after harvesting for sowing. Shelling of pods should be done 2-3 days before sowing. The optimum sowing periods are June-July, 2nd fortnight of November and February for the kharif, rabi and summer groundnut crops respectively.

Seed treatment: Seed should be genetically pure, viable and free from external

1126

damage and disease infection. After shelling, all shriveled, immature and damaged/ infected seeds should be removed and only well filled and quality seed should be used for sowing. To control seed-borne diseases, seeds should be treated with Thiram or Mancozeb (3 g/kg of kernel) or Carbendazim (2 g/kg).

Seed rate and spacing: Normally, about 120 kg seeds/ha for bunch and 100-110 kg seeds/ha for semi-spreading and spreading varieties are adequate. The most common spacings recommended for spanish bunch type varieties is 30 cm x 10 cm to achieve a plant population of 3.33 lakh/ha. In case of virginia bunch and runner types, the most common spacings recommended are 45 cm x 10 cm or 30 cm x15 cm to secure a plant population of 2.22 lakh/ha. In case of rabi/summer groundnut, the recommended spacings are 22.5 cm x10 cm or 30 x 7.5 cm.

Method of sowing: In India sowing of groundnut is done either by the seed drill or behind the country plough or by hand dibbling. Some times, sowing is done behind the country plough or seeds are dropped in the furrow through a draw tube attached to the plough by a rope. Sowing can also be done through tractor-mounted groundnut planter. Broad bed and furrow (BBF) method of planting helps in better moisture conservation and increases yield under rainfed condition.

Nutrient management: Groundnut being a legume needs more phosphorus, being an oilseed crop requires more sulphur and it needs more calcium for proper shell formation and filling. For realizing the potential yield and for sustaining soil fertility, integrated nutrient management practices involving microbial, organic and inorganic fertilizers should be adopted.

Seed inoculation with efficient strains of rhizobium can partially meet the nitrogen requirement of crop. The cultures of bradyrhizobium like NC 92, IGR 6, IGR 40, TAL 1000 and TNAU 14, which fix nitrogen efficiently, have been recommended for groundnut. The following method of seed inoculation is recommended.

* Inoculation with bradyrhizobium is done about | hour before commencement of sowing.

Solution of 10% jaggery or molasses is prepared in water. For treating 100 kg seed of groundnut, approximately one litre of this solution is sufficient.

* 200 g of carrier-based culture of bradyrhizobium containing 10° to 10! cells/g carrier is added and mixed with 10% cold solution of jaggery or sugar to make slurry.

Seed should be spread on a floor or polythene sheet and thoroughly mixed with slurry of inoculant’s strain. For uniform application of inoculum, small batches of seed may be treated at a time.

* Then the seeds are dried in shade to avoid mortality of bradyrhizobium. The seeds are then sown immediately to avoid their exposure to the sun. To sustain the overall health of the soil and continued good yields, a desirable level of organic carbon in the soil (0.3-0.7%) must be maintained. Application of organic matter to the soil is a must for supplying organic carbon. Well -decomposed FYM or compost, 10-15 tonnes/ha should be applied well before sowing and should be incorporated into the soil.

Chemical fertilizers should be applied based on soil test values. Besides N, P and K, calcium and sulphur are the major secondary nutrients required by groundnut. The requirement of these nutrients can be met through application of gypsum. Well-

1127

OILSEED CROPS

powdered gypsum (30 mesh) should be applied to the crop, as close to the base of the plant as possible when it is in its peak of flowering. Availability of sufficient moisture is necessary at the time of application of gypsum for its efficient uptake. The recommended fertilizers for groundnut in different states are given in Table 33.4.

In rainfed areas, all fertilizers (NPK) are applied before planting. Under irrigated conditions, application of N in two equal splits, one before sowing and the other 30 days thereafter, is found to increase the yield.

Deficiency of micronutrients in groundnut has been reported from several major groundnut-growing states. Their application should be decided on the basis of soil test. Deficiencies of micronutrients prevalent in different states (Table 33.5) and schedule for correcting them are given in Table 33.6.

Weed management: Weeds cause considerable reduction in yield. A reduction of 20 to 45% in yield due to weeds has been recorded. For controlling weeds, and also to keep the soil in a friable condition, the crop should generally receive a hand-weeding and one or two hoeings, with bullock-drawn implements, the first about three weeks after sowing and the second and the third about a fotnight and a month later. No interculture should be done after the pegs have commenced going underground.

1128

Micronutrient Rate of application of soil in furrows Application to the crop as a spray

Earthing up can be done in the case of bunch and semispreading types to facilitate the maximum penetration of the pegs into the soil. Weeding can also be done quickly and efficiently with a wheel hand-hoe, if the soil is light. It should be run before weeds make excessive growth. Presowing soil incorporation of Alachlor or Fluchloralin @ 1.5 kg a.i./ha, or pre-emergence application of Pendimethalin @ 1 kg a.i./ha along with 2 intercultures at 30 and 45 days after sowing have been recommended for effective and economical control of weeds in groundnut.

Water management: In kharif, advancing the sowing date by 10-15 days with one pre-sowing irrigation can increase the yield substantially. Life- saving irrigations should be given at critical growth stages at the time of moisture stress. A good crop of rabi groundnut can be obtained with a maximum of 8-9 irrigations. Summer groundnut requires about 11-12 irrigations.

Insect-pests and diseases

* Major sucking pests like aphids, jassids and thrips can effectively be controlled by spraying 0.05% Dimethoate.

Setting up light traps for destroying the moths may control leaf miner. The economic threshold studies indicated that chemical control should be adopted when the larval population reaches 61-70/100 leaflets. Carbaryl 50 we 0.2% spray is most economical. The variety NRCG 2323 is tolerant to leaf miner.

Red-hairy caterpillars may be controlled effectively by spraying Monocrotophos 40 Ec @ 1,000 ml/ha before the caterpillars develop hair. Egg masses and larvae, which can easily be detected, may be collected and destroyed. A biological control measure through spraying of nuclear polyhedrosis virus (NPV) developed at Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (TNAU), Coimbatore is found effective and economical.

Spodoptera, Helicoverpa, Anarsia and Plusia pests are nocturnal in habit and hence contro] measures have to be taken up either in the early morning hours or in the late evening hours. To control these pests, spraying Quinalphos @ 0.05% @ 400 ml/ha may be undertaken. Other insecticides like Carbaryl 0.2%, Parathion 0.05% are also effective. Planting of castor, pearl millet and pigeonpea as trap crops in groundnut has been found to be effective. Varieties GO 103, MK 374, NCAC 60 and VRIGIA-RUL are tolerant to Spodoptera. Integration of foliar application of biocontrol agent, Nomuraea rileyi @ 2 g/litre and foliar spray of

1129

OILSEED CROPS

5% neem seed kernel extract (NSKE) is most economical for the management of Spodoptera.

+ White grub, a menace in the light-soils of Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab and Haryana can be controlled effectively by treating the seed with Chlorpyriphos 20 ec @ 12.5 ml/kg seed. Soil treatment with Thimet 10 c @ 20-25 kg/ha is recommended for the control of white grub wherever the population is high.

Storage pests

Among the storage pests, the groundnut pod-borer (bruchid beetle) is the most devastating storage pest in groundnut, which can cause pod damage to the extent of 90-100%. So far, no single control measure has been successful for controlling this pest. Therefore, the following integrated approach is suggested.

* Clean up the warehouse or godown inside and outside before storing groundnut.

* Spray insecticide (Malathion1.25%) @ 5 litre spray solution for 100 m’ on wall, floor and roof of the godown before storage.

* Bring down moisture content of pod to 8% and for seed to 7%.

+ If jute bags are used for storage, they should be impregnated with Malathion 0.25% and should be dried before use.

Diseases

Early and late leaf spots and rust: Bavistin 0.05% along with Dithane M-45 0.2% should be sprayed at 2-3 weeks interval for 2-3 times starting from 4-5 weeks after planting. Two to 3 spraying of Chlorothalonil 0.3% at 45,55 and 75 DAS controls the diseases effectively. Crude neem leaf extract (2-5%) at two weeks interval can also control the foliar diseases. This practice, besides eco-friendly, is cheaper and could be adopted by the small and marginal farmers. Varieties R 2001-1, VG 9816, PBS 29017, JALW 26, TG 51, TG 52 and TKG 19A are tolerant to late leaf spot and rust.

Collar rot, stem rot and dry root rot: The seed should be treated with 5 g of Dithane M-45 or 2 g of Bavistin per kg seed. Application of soil amendments like castor cake @ 0.5 tonne/ha and bio-pesticide formulation of Trichoderma viride @ 25 kg/ha have been found to be effective in controlling stem and root rots. Varieties ICGV 91167, Y 1024, CSMG 84-1 and JL 80 are tolerant to stem rot. Dry root rot tolerant varieties are ICUG 92195, CSMG 9884, DSG 1, TG 17 and RG 141.

Peanut bud necrosis disease: This disease caused by peanut bud necrosis virus cannot be controlled through chemical. Thrips which transmit the disease should be controlled by using Rogor @ 400 ml/ha. The cultural methods like early planting, closer spacing and intercropping with millets are advocated. Varieties like M 95-71, No. 1041 and PI 158853 are tolerant to peanut bud necrosis disease.

For the control of major seed and seedling diseases, integration of deep-tillage during summer and crop rotation with wheat and seed treatment with Trichoderma harzianum @ 4 g/kg seed is most effective and economical.

Harvesting

The prominent symptoms of maturity are the yellowing of Icaves, the shedding of the older leaves, the development of the proper colour of the testa and a dark tint inside the shell. In tracts infested with pigs, crows or jackals, the watching of the crop

1130

at sowing and maturity is often necessary. The bunch and semi-spreading varieties are usually harvested by hand-pulling when there is adequate moisture in the soil. The spreading types, on the other hand, are harvested by digging with a spade, or by ploughing or working a blade harrow. The pulled-out plants are stacked for a few days for drying and the pods are stripped afterwards.

Threshing

In bunch types, the plants are stacked in heaps with the pod ends exposed and then after a week the pods are stripped by hand. A simple comb type hand stripper and power-operated stripper are the useful mechanical devices available to separate pods. In case of runner types, the plants are allowed to dry and then beaten with sticks or fed to a thresher to separate the pods from vines.

Storage

The stripped pods are cleaned and dried to a safe moisture content of not more than 5%. Damp nuts, if stored, will ferment and allow the development of poisonous moulds, such as Aspergillus flavus in the kernels, leading to contamination with aflatoxin - a health hazard both for humans and livestock. The oil expressed from such produce will be rancid and the cake when fed to poultry results in a heavy mortality of the birds. It is desirable to store groundnuts in gunny bags as pods rather than as kernels. The gunny bags are stacked in a store room over planks in tiers comprising not more than ten in each in such a way that the air keeps circulating. The room used for storing groundnut should be thoroughly cleaned and white-washed at the beginning of the season. The store rooms should be periodically inspected to ensure that there is no storage pest. If any insect damage is noticed, arrangements should be made to control the pest or to dispose of the stock immediately, after proper cleaning.

In order to check the rapid loss of seed viability in rabi/summer groundnut, the following steps may be followed.

1. In case of irrigated groundnut, delay the harvest after giving the last irrigation to the extent possible so as to bring down the pod moisture level, without in any way risking pod losses in the soil. If the crop is grown entirely under residual moisture, without supplemental irrigation, this point has no relevance.

2. After uprooting, tie-up plants with pods intact into bundles and keep bundles in a single layer with pods upward, under shade. The shade could be provided either by a big tree or a varandah of a house where free air movement takes place. If the pods immediately after harvesting are exposed to sun drying for a longer period, the loss of seed viability during storage will be rapid.

3. When dried in bundles, the pods may be detached from plants and spread in a thin layer under shade for further drying. The thorough driage of the produce can be judged from the following test.

(a) The pods should give rattling sound when shaken.

(b) When a kernel is pressed between the thumb and index finger, it should easily split into 2 cotyledons.

(c) When the surface of the kernel is rubbed hard a portion of the testa should come off.

1131

be stored in polyethylene-lined gunny bag along with calcium chloride @ 250 g/30 kg pods as follows.

(i) The polyethylene-lined gunny bag is first filled with approximately 15 kg pods; (ii) a wide-mouthed plastic bottle with several perforations on its upper half is taken and about 250 g CaCl,, wrapped in a muslin cloth, is suspended half-way inside the bottle in sucha manner that it does not touch the bottom, and the extra muslin cloth rests on the rim of the mouth; (iii) the screw cap is tightly fixed and then the bottle is kept upright inside the polythene bag and the remaining portion of the bag is filled with groundnut pods; (iv) the bags are then tied or stitched at the top and stored in a vertical position. The additional expenditure involved towards the cost of calcium chloride works out to about Rs 35/q pods.

The above method keeps seed viability up to 80% for a period of 10 months, i.e. from one season to the other.

Management of aflatoxin: Aflatoxin production in groundnut caused by Asperg’ illus flavus group of fungi is a problem mainly during post-harvest processing and storage. About 81% of the kernels are immediately crushed for oil and hence aflatoxin is not a major problem in the domestic market. However, it is of concern in respect of exportable commodities, i.e. kernel, oil-cake etc.

Following are some of the measures to avoid aflatoxin contamination.

* Avoid mechanical and biological damage to the crop particularly during cultivation, harvesting and subsequent processing.

+ Harvest the crop at peak maturity and use inverted windrow method to optimise curing.

* Dry the produce as rapidly as possible but the rate of drying must be controlled to prevent excessive skin slippage and splitting of kernel.

« Dry groundnut pods to a safer moisture of 8% before storage.

* Store the produce at a low humidity.

Polythene mulching technology in groundnut

The use of polythene mulch in groundnut production holds great promise, if biodegradable polythene sheets are made available. The use of polythene mulch increases the groundnut yields by 20 to 45% in different areas over no mulching. Mulching has proved specially promising in light soils. Apart from rapid seed germination and early crop vigour in areas where soil temperature falls below 18°C during germination, it also saves 40 to 50% of total water use by the crop by reducing evaporation losses. The reduced evaporation slows down salinity build up in the root zone. The incidence of sucking pests was reported to be low with polythene mulching due to “glittering effect” and the activity of micro-organisms is greatly increased leading to faster decomposition and transformation of organic matter in soil and augmenting the nutrient availability. Weed population is also reduced and crop matures 7-10 days early under polythene mulching. The oil content in seed was also reported to increase with higher oleic : linoleic acid ratio. Polythene mulching increases the net returns by Rs 15,000 to 20,000/ha with higher B : C ratio (2.5) than unmulched plots (1.7).

Use of non-biodegradable polythene mulch is beset with problems as it is mixed up with haulms during harvesting which when utilized as cattle feed leads to complications in animals. Therefore, only biodegradable polythene must be used for mulching. There

1132

is also need for development of implements for mechanization of the technology.

RAPESEED-MUSTARD

Rapeseed-mustard (Brassica species) group of crops is the third most important oilseed crop after soybean and groundnut, contributing nearly 20-25% of the total oilseed production in the country. The genus Brassica comprises 37 species, mainly annual or biennial herbs, and many of them are similar in appearance. Brassica rapa is most variable and was originally the most widespread of the various Brassica species (Table 33.7).

In India, generally four groups are cultivated. They are brown mustard (rai or raya

or /aha)- B. juncea; sarson (yellow sarson) - B. campestris L. var. sarson Prain; brown sarson - B. campestris L. var. dichotoma Watt; Toria - B. campestris L. var. toria Duth and Jaramira or tara - Eruca sativa Mill. In trade, sarson, toria and taramira are known as rapeseed and rai as mustard. Banarsi rai (B. nigra Koch) which does not fall under any of the above four groups is a garden crop used as a spice. The cultivation of white mustard (Brassica alba syn. Sinapis alba) is no longer found in India. Rai and yellow sarson are self-fertile and rest of the cruciferous oilseeds, viz. brown sarson, toria, taramira, Banarsi rai and white mustard, are self-incompatible. Rapeseed- mustard group of crops are being cultivated in 28 states of the country.

Indian mustard or brown mustard (rai) was originally introduced from China into north-eastern India, from where it had spread to Afghanistan via Punjab, eastern Afghanistan, together with the adjoining north-western India. It is predominantly cultivated in Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat. Its cultivation is also being extended to non-traditional areas of southern states like Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh. The cultivation of brown sarson which once dominated the entire rapeseed-mustard growing region, now shadowed by Indian mustard. There are 2 different ecotypes of brown sarson: /otni (self-incompatible) and tora (self-compatible). The /otmi is predominantly cultivated in colder regions of the country, particularly in Kashmir and Himachal valley. The sora on the other hand is cultivated in limited areas of eastern Uttar Pradesh. Yellow sarson is now mainly grown in Asom, Bihar, north-eastern states, Orissa, eastern Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. Toria is a short-duration crop cultivated largely in Asom, Bihar, Orissa and West Bengal in the east mainly as winter crop. In Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Uttarakhand and western Uttar Pradesh, it is grown as a catch crop.

1133

OILSEED CROPS

Taramira is grown in the drier parts of north-west India comprising Rajasthan, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh. Taramira is relatively a recent introduction into India. It is believed to be a native of southern Europe and North Africa. Gobhi sarson and karan rai are the new emerging oilseed crops having limited areas of cultivation. Gobhi sarson is a long-duration crop confined to Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and Punjab.

The oil content of seeds of different forms ranges from 30 to 48%. In white mustard, oil content ranges from 25 to 33%. This oil is the main cooking medium in the northern India. The seed and oil are used as condiment in pickles preparation and for flavouring curries and vegetables. Oil cake is mostly used as cattle feed. The leaves of young plants are used as green vegetable. Early Asian and European scripts mention use of seed and oil as medicinal remedies for stomach and skin problems. It is used in Ayurvedic medicated oils for massage in many paralytic diseases of nervous system. Its oil is also used in manufacturing greases, lubricans and in soap-making industries.

Rape and mustard include annual herbs ranging in height from 0.45 m (in some varieties of toria) to 1.75 m (in yellow sarson). Roots, in general, are long and tapering. Toria is more or less a surface-feeder and brown sarson has long roots, with a limited lateral spread, enabling its successful cultivation under drier conditions. Yellow sarson has both extensive and lateral spread. In soria and brown sarson, the branches arise at an angle of 30° to 40°. In yellow sarson, branches arise laterally at an angle of about 10° to 20° and give plant a narrow and pyramidal shape. The inflorescence is corymbose-raceme. In yellow sarson, the four petals are spread apart, and in brown sarson and toria, petals overlap or may be placed apart, depending upon the variety. The flowers bear hypogynous syncarpous ovary. In brown sarson and toria, ovary is bicarpellary, and in the case of yellow sarson, it may also be tri-or tetra-carpellary.

The fruit is a siliqua. The pods are two, three or four-valved, depending upon the number of carpels in the ovary. The flowers begin to open from 8 Am and continue up to 12 noon.

Distribution, area and production

The crop is grown both in subtropical and tropical countries. The total production in the world is 49.47 million tonnes from an area of 28.47 million hectares (2006). The major rapeseed-mustard-producing countries in the world are Canada, China, Germany and France. India with an area of 5.82 million hectares and 5.83 million tonnes of production ranks second in area and third in production in rapeseed-mustard scenario of the world (2007-08). The average yield of these crops in India varies from 1,000 to 1,200 kg/ha. Rajasthan is the largest producer of rapeseed-mustard followed by Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Gujarat and Asom. The other states with minor production are Orissa and Bihar. Rapeseed and mustard group of crops are also grown in northern most and north-eastern states of the country. There has been tremendous increase in area and production of rapeseed- mustard during the last two decades mainly in the states of Rajasthan, Haryana, West Bengal and Gujarat. The annual compound growth rate of 2.07, 4.16 and 2.06% in area, production and productivity of rapeseed-mustard was achieved during the period 1950-51 to 2006-07.

1134 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

Climate and soil

The rapeseed and mustard crops are of the tropical as well as of temperate zones and require relatively cool temperatures for satisfactory growth. In India, they are grown in the rabi season from September-October to February-March. The rapeseed and mustard crops grow well in areas having 25 to 40 cm of rainfall. Sarson and taramira are preferred in low-rainfall areas, whereas raya and toria are grown in medium and high-rainfall areas respectively.

These crops thrive best in light to heavy loams of pH around 7. Raya may be grown on all types of soils, but foria does best in loam to heavy loams. Sarson is suited to light-loam soils and taramira is mostly grown on very light soils.

Cropping systems

Mustard is usually cultivated as a sole crop in rainfed areas of kharif fallows. However, it is intercropped with chickpea or wheat. It is also an important crop in different crop sequences in rainfed and irrigated areas (Table 33.8).

1135

OILSEED CROPS

(Table 33.8 concluded)

1136

1136 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

(Table 33.8 concluded)

F, Fodder.

Cultivation

Land preparation: Brassica has small seeds and, therefore, for good germination and stand, a fine tilth is required. Clody fields besides losing soil moisture rapidly, also provide shelter to painted bug and saw flay, which are important pests of rapeseed- mustard. In rainfed areas, the harrowings have to be done after every effective shower during the rainy season. In case mustard is to be grown after kharif crop, field should be prepared immediately after harvesting of preceding crop. In irrigated areas, the first ploughing is done with a medium-sized soil-turning plough, followed by 2-4 ploughings with a desi plough or a cultivator. Planking is given after every ploughing. In rainfed areas, one to two ploughings with a desi plough or a cultivator, each followed by planking, may be given. Toria, in particular, requires a fairly moist seed-bed for good germination, but excessive moisture should be avoided.

Varieties: A large number of high-yielding varieties have been released in rapeseed- mustard in recent years. Replacement of old varieties with these can increase productivity by at least 15-20% on farmers’ fields (Table 33.9).

Seed rate and spacing: Optimum plant population is a pre-requisite for a good harvest of the crop. For this, correct seed rate and spacings must be followed. In general, seed rate between 4 and 5 kg/ha is the optimum. Ideal spacing adopted in most of the states is 45 cm row to row and 15 cm plant to plant. Closer spacing of 30 cm * 15 cm is also adopted in some areas.

Time of sowing: Timely sowing of the crop is very essential for realizing maximum yield. Further, the crop often also escapes insect-pests and diseases. The rapeseed-

1137

OILSEED CROPS

mustard crops are grown in diverse agroclimatic conditions, hence, optimum sowing dates vary widely (Table 33.10).

Seed treatment: Treat the seeds with Thiram 2.5 g/kg or Bavistin 2 g/kg is for protecting the crop from seed-borne diseases. Seed treatment with garlic bulb extract (2%) has been found effective against Sclerotina rot.

Method of sowing: It is advisable to sow the crop in furrows with ridger-seeder. Seed soaked in water before sowing ensures good germination and early seedling vigour. The crop of rapeseed or mustard is sown at a depth of 4 to 5 cm in lines, with a drill, or with a “pora” (tube) attached to the plough. Thinning is done three weeks after sowing to maintain the desired plant-plant distance.

Weed management: Rapeseed-mustard fields should be kept weed-free for the first 45-60 days. Yield loss due to weeds could vary from 20 to 70%. One hand-

1138

1139

OILSEED CROPS

weeding is given at 20-25 days followed by hoeing and second at 40-45 days stage are beneficial. Normally, one weeding under rainfed conditions and two weedings under irrigated conditions is adequate. To control weeds, Fluchloralin or Pendimethalin @ 1 kga.i/ha can be applied as pre-emergence spray. For post-emergence control of weeds, Isoproturon 0.75 kg/ha at 25 DAS is recommended.

Nutrient management: Fertilizer application has been reported to increase yield by 37-88%; 40 kg of N/ha is optimum for all rapeseed and mustard crops in rainfed areas. Under irrigated conditions, doses of 40, 60 and 80 kg of N/ha are considered

1140 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

optimum for foria, sarson and raya respectively (Table 33.11). For taramira, 20 kg of N+/ha is sufficient.

FYM, compost, green manure (Sesbania) and various animal wastes must be applied to the soil 10-15 days before planting. Sulphur @ 20 kg/ha and boron @ | kg/ha are other nutrients required for the crop. Secondary and micronutrient application must be taken up wherever the soils are deficient. By the use of Azotobactor or Azospirillum, 20-30 kg N/ha can be saved. Addition of vermicompost along with Azotobacter and phosphorus-solubilising bacteria (PSB) enhances mustard yield considerably.

Irrigation management: Normally, one irrigation at pre-flowering stage is adequate for toria and yellow sarson. In mustard, two irrigations are recommended, the first at rosette stage (20-30 DAS) and the second at the siliqua formation stage (50-60 DAS). Furrow irrigation or flood irrigation methods are generally followed in India.

Insect-pests and diseases

Insect-pests

There are at least 38 insects associated with Brassica crops. Among them, mustard aphid is the key pest followed by white mustard fly, painted bug, pea leaf miner and Bihar hairy caterpillar (Table 33.12).

Diseases

Diseases cause yield losses ranging from 10 to 90%. Major diseases affecting the yield are Alternaria blight, white rust and downy mildew and the minor diseases are powdery mildew, bacterial rot and Sclerotinia stem rot (Table 33.13).

Protection of crop from frost

Occasionally, frost prevails from last week of December to January end in north and north-western parts of the country resulting into considerable yield loss or sometimes total crop failure. The following measures may be adopted to minimize the loss:

+ Irrigate the fields when the temperature is low.

* Spray of Dimethyl sulphoxide (0.5 ml/litre), Foltaf/Difolatan (0.2%) and Mancozeb (0.3%) prevents the effects of freezing on seeds.

Harvesting

Usually rapeseed-mustard crops are harvested as soon as 75% of pods turn yellow. Toria, which takes 75 to 90 days to mature, is the earliest crop to be harvested. The moisture in the seed should be around 30%. Harvesting can be done with the help of serrated sickles leaving about 15 cm high stubbles in the field. The mechanical reaper or harvester can also be used in large fields.

Threshing

The crop may be tied in small bundles, stacked and dried in sun till the moisture content of the seed reaches between 12 and 20%. Threshing is done manually or by the usual method of treading by bullocks or by running a tractor over the dried plants spread on the threshing floor. When the produce is more, the combine or multicrop thresher is also used.

1141

OILSEED CROPS

+ Mechanical control is ecofriendly method which provides an effective check by removing infested leaves containing first/second instar gregarious phase larvae and dip them in kerosenized water or insecticidal solution

+ Spray the crop with Malathion 50 ec @ 1,000 ml in 500 litres of water/ha

* Removal of alternate host plants from the surroundings is beneficial

1142

Sowing should be done in second fortnight of October

Phyllody Orobanche

Rogue the virus-affected plants

Uproot and destroy parasitic plants before seed setting

Continuous cropping of toria/mustard should be avoided

Follow crop rotation with cereals and legumes

Sesame-mustard sequence significantly reduces Orobanche infestation

Apply soybean oil on Orobanche

1143

OILSEED CROPS

Yield potential

Under good management, seed yields of 800-1,500 kg/ha under rainfed conditions and 2,000 to 2,500 kg/ha under irrigated conditions can be expected.

Storage

For safe storage, the moisture content in the seed should be 8%. Before storage, winnowing is done with the help of natural air current by slowly dropping the produce from a basket or by the use of power-operated cleaner. The seed, after drying in the sun, is stored in gunny bags or bins.

SOYBEAN

Soybean (Glycine max) is the major oilseed crop in the world accounting for nearly 50% of total oilseeds acreage as well as production. It provides approximately 60% of the vegetable protein and 30% of the oil in the world. Soybean ranks second in vegetable oil economy of India after groundnut.

The cultivated soybean originated in China during 2800 ac. The eastern half of North China was believed to be the primary centre and Manchuria, the secondary centre of origin. From there, it spread to Korea and Japan. It was cultivated in Europe and USA in 17th century. It was introduced in India during seventies of 20th century.

Soybean is primarily utilized as a source of protein and oil. Soybean seed contains 20% oil and 40-42% quality protein. Soybean oil is consumed as salad oil, shortening and margarine. The oil is used for preparation of frozen desserts, cookie shortenings, confections, icings, icecream coating, whipped toppings and coffee whiteners. Industrial uses of oil include soap, paints, resins and drying oil. A number of protein rich products, viz. soymilk, soypaneer, soy sauce and soy flour, can be produced from seeds. The soybean oil comprises mainly polyunsaturated fatty acids like oleic and linoleic. Protein, which is in the range of 39-42%, is mostly globulin and partly albumins. Lysine is the major aminoacid. The antinutritional substances present in the seed include trypsin inhibitor, hemagglutinins and oligosaccharides.

The cultivated soybean is an annual, generally exhibiting an erect, sparsely branched, bush-type growth habit with pinnately trifoliate leaves. Purple or white flowers are borne on short axillary racemes on reduced peduncles. The pods are either straight or slightly curved, usually hirsute. The one to three seeds per pod are usually ovoid to sub-spherical in shape. The seed coats range in colour from light yellow, olive green and brown to reddish black. It is a self-pollinated species propagated commercially by seed. It has complete flower, having 10 stamens arranged around the pistil. The stigma is receptive to pollen about one day before pollen is shed from anthers of the same flower.

Flower initiation is controlled by photoperiod, temperature and genotype. Soybean stem growth and flowering habit are of two types: indeterminate and determinate. In case of indeterminate, apical meristem continues vegetative activity during most of the growing season. The inflorescences are axillary racemes and pods are produced rather uniformly on the stem. The determinate type is characterized by vegetative development which ceases when the apical meristem becomes an inflorescence, both axillary and terminal recemes exist and pods are borne rather uniformly along the stem except for cluster of pods at the terminal racemes. The flowering period and the

1144

time of overlap of vegetative and reproductive growth is greater for the indeterminate than determinate type.

Distribution, area and production

Soybean is grown in 92.99 million hectares in the world to produce 221.50 million tonnes (2006). The USA tops the list in soybean acerage and production. The other major soybean-producing countries are Brazil, China, Argentina, Indonesia, Canada, Paraguay and Italy. India, with 8.88 million hectares of soybean-growing area and 10.97 million tonnes production ranks fifth in the world (2007-08). The average yield in India is about 1,235 kg/ha. It contributes 30-37% to India’s oilseeds production. The crop showed an annual compound growth rates of 17.23, 18.19 and 1.33% in area, production and productivity between 1971-72 and 2006-07. Madhya Pradesh produces nearly 50% of total soybean production. Maharashtra is the second largest producer of soybean contributing 36% of total production. The other major soybean- producing states are Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka.

Climate and soil

Soybean can be grown in fairly wide range of climates and soils. Soils with a normal pH of 7 and a fair degree of water-retention capacity are, however, better suited for its cultivation. It grows well in sandy loam to clay soil. The crop is highly sensitive to latitude because of its photosensitivity. The optimum temperature for rapid germination of soybean is approximately 30°C. It can be grown in rainy, spring and summer seasons.

Cropping systems

Soybean is ideally suited for fitting in several sequence and intercropping systems (Table 33.14).

1145

OILSEED CROPS

Cultivation

Land preparation: Being a leguminous crop, soybean requires fine seed-bed with least clods. Deep ploughing by soil-turning plough during summer is desirable. It should be followed by 2-3 cross harrowings or cultivator operations to ensure ideal seed-bed in June. To avoid water stagnation, seed-bed should be provided with little

Varieties: Improved varieties recommended for different regions should be grown for getting higher yields (Table 33.15).

1146

Northern hill zone (Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand) PK 416, Pusa 16, Pusa 20, Ahilya 1, VLS 47, Himso 1563, VLS 21, Bragg, PRS 1, VLS 59, VLS 63

Northern plain zone (Punjab, Haryana, Delhi, NE Plains of Uttar Pradesh, Western Bihar) PK 416, PK 472, VLS 21, Pusa 16, PS 1024, PS 1042, PS 1347, PS 1029, PS 1092, SL 295, PS 1241, SL 525, Bragg, Pusa 9814, Pusa 9712, SL 688, PS 1225 (Tarai and Bhabar region of Uttar

Central zone (Madhya Pradesh, Bundelkhand region of Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Western parts of Maharashtra) JS 71-05, JS 80-21, JS 335, JS 90-41, Ahilya 1, Ahilya 2, Ahilya 3, Ahilya 4, Indira Soya 9, MAUS 32, MAUS 47, MAUS 61-2, MAUS 81, JS 93-05, PS 1024, PS 1029 (Rust tolerant), PK 416 (YMV tolerant), Pusa 16, PK 472, JS 75-46, Bragg, JS

Southern Zone (Southern parts of Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala) Hardee, KHsb 2, PS 1029, MACS 124, MAUS 2 (Pooja), MACS 450, JS 335, MAUS 61, LSb 1, Bragg, CO 3, TAMS 38 (Vidarbha region), Phule Kalyani (DS 228), RKS 18 (Pratap Soya 2),

North -Eastern Zone

(Asom, West Bengal, Meghalaya, JS 80-21, PK 472, Bragg, Pusa 16, RAUS 5, JS Jharkhand, Eastern Bihar, Orissa and 335, MAUS 71, JS 97-52 Chhattisgarh)

Planting time: Photoperiodic response dictates the time of planting for maximum yield of soybean. Early planting gives too great canopy to produce maximum yield, whereas late planting results in canopy development too restricted for maximum yield. Soybean planting dates depend on the variety and the agroecological region. Obviously, photoperiodic effects, occurrence of drought and flood decide the date of sowing of the crop. Sowing time should be adjusted in such a way that one can escape from these natural calamities.

In India, soybean is mostly a rainy season crop, sown in June last week to first week of July and harvested in October. Under irrigated condition, a spring crop of soybean is also taken. The sowing of spring soybean is done between 15 February and 15 March. Recommended time of planting for soybean in different parts of India is as follows:

Southern zone Kharif : Middle of June to end of July

Rabi First week of October to December

Seed rate, spacing and plant population: Seed rate depends on seed size (test weight), variety, germination percentage and date of planting. Generally, 75-80 kg seeds/ha is recommended in kharifand 100 kg/ha in spring. Row spacing of 30-45 cm in central, southern and north-eastern zones, 45 cm in northern hill zone and 45-60 cm in Northern plain zone is recommended. Plant-to-plant spacing should be 5 cm. The ideal plant population varies from 0.4 to 0.6 million/ha.

1147

OILSEED CROPS

Depth of planting: A seed depth of 2.5 to 4 cm is optimum. Shallower depth may be justified to crust-prone areas and deeper in sandy soils. Some cultivars have inhibitors of hypocotyl elongation and for them shallow depth is recommended. Under conditions of optimum moisture and heavy soils, the crop should be sown at 2-3 cm depth, whereas for optimum moisture, medium to light textured soils, it should be planted at 3-4 cm depth. Planting can be done with the help of seed drills or with tractor-operated planters.

Seed treatment and seed inoculation: In order to get rid of seed-borne diseases, seeds must be treated with Thiram 75 wr + Carbendazim 50 we (2:1) @ 3 g/kg seed or Trichoderma viride @ 4-5 g/kg seed. For higher yield, seed inoculation with Bradyrhizobium japonicum culture (500 g/75 kg seed) + PSB/PSM (500 g/75 kg seed) is recommended.

Manures and fertilizers: Manure and fertilizer application must be decided depending on soil-test value, productivity potential, expected yield, cropping system, management and method of fertilizer application. In addition to 10 tonnes FYM/ha, application of 20 kg N, 60-80 kg P,O,, 20 kg each of K,O and S is recommended.

The FYM must be applied at the time of land preparation. All the fertilizers must be applied at the time of sowing.

Zinc deficiency is a problem in high rainfall uplands and under sodic soils. Under conditions of northern plains, application of 5 kg Zn/ha through ZnSO, is recommended in addition to recommended doses of NPK and S.

Weed management: Normally, weed control in soybean is accomplished using mechanical intercultivation (hoeing) or by the use of herbicides. Hand weeding is preferred under small holding situations. Proper rotation may also reduce weed intensity and flora. To avoid the competition during early growth stage, soybean field should be kept free of weeds for the first 30-40 days after sowing. Two manual weedings, 20-25 and 40-45 days after sowing are sufficient for control of weeds. During rainy season, due to continuous rains, the hand weeding may not be possible at proper time. Under such circumstances, use of herbicides has been found very effective. Fluchloralin or Trifluralin @ 1 kg a.i/ha as pre-plant incorporation or Alachlor @ 2 kg a.i/ha or Pendimethalin @ 1 kg a.i/ha or Metolachlor @ 1 kg a.i/ha or Clomazone @ 1 kg a.i/ ha as pre-emergence or Imazethapyr @ 100 g a.i/ha or Chlorimuron-ethyl @ 10 g a.i./ha or Quizalofop ethyl @ 50 g a.i./ha as post-emergence (15-20 DAS) in 750-800 litres water/ha.

Water management: One of the most frequent and severe environmental limitations on soybean seed yield is water supply and drainage of excess water from the field. Soybean is often cultivated during rainy season, but supplemental irrigation becomes necessary if larger dry spells occur. Soil moisture stress at seed emergence and pod filling stages are most sensitive. Soil moisture deficit shows relatively less loss of grain yield as compared to other crops, because soybean has an extended period of flowering. The early flower drop which is caused due to moisture stress could be compensated by the late flowers maturing into pods.

Avoid flooding of soybean fields at any stage of the crop. Flooding at floral initiation is detrimental because it retards nodule and overall root activity, which is most crucial at this stage. In case of kharif crop, irrigation is generally not needed and it is grown rainfed provided the rains are well distributed, otherwise the crop needs water at critical growth stages. However, during summer, the crop can be grown only under assured

1148

irrigation and it needs around 5-6 irrigations. To achieve maximum yield target, the spring soybean crop should be irrigated at sprouting, flowering, pod initiation and grain filling.

Water stress at the end of flowering and pod initiation is most critical because it leads to flower and pod abortion. Stress during the grain filling reduces the seed size. Therefore, it is essential to apply sufficient water to the field for better germination and then to irrigate the crop before pod development and filling stages for obtaining higher grain yield.

Insect-pests and diseases

Bihar hairy caterpillar, stem fly, girdle beetle, leaf roller, leaf minor, white fly and green semilooper are some of the major insect-pests of soybean (Table 33.16).

Among diseases, charcoal rot, Rhizoctonia aerial rot, Alternaria leaf spot, anthracnose, bacterial pustules, bacterial blight, bean yellow mosaic and soybean mosaic are important (Table 33.17).

Harvesting and threshing

When pods become golden yellow, black or gray, the crop is ready for harvest. At harvest, moisture content of the seed should be 15-17%. The maturity period ranges from 90 to 140 days depending on the varieties.

When the holdings are small, manual harvesting close to the ground is followed. Use of reapers and combine harvesters is common on large area for soybean harvesting.

Threshing can be done either with the mechanical soybean thresher or some conventional methods used in other legumes. Threshing should be done carefully and any kind of severe beating or trampling may damage the seed coat and thus reduce the

1149

OILSEED CROPS

quality and germinability. Soybean can also be threshed with wheat thresher with change in sieve, reduction in cylinder speed to 300-400 rpm and increase in fan speed. A moisture content of 13-14% is ideal for threshing with thresher.

Yield potential

With good crop management, seed yield of about | ,600-2,000 kg/ha under rainfed conditions and 2,000-2,500 kg/ha under irrigated conditions can be expected. Under high input management, yield levels of 3,000 kg/ha can also be realized.

Drying and storage

To maintain longer shelf-life and avoid fungal damage to soybean seeds during

1150

1150 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

storage, drying to 10% seed moisture content is essential. It is more so in humid regions with intermittent showers and high humidity. Drying on floor is most common but seed should be gathered every evening and respread during next morning for drying. Hot air speed driers are used on large farms, but care is needed to prevent higher than 40°C if the seed stock is meant for resowing.

Storage seems compulsory with most farmers and large farm holdings. Steel bins, tin cans, jars, polythene bags and gunny bags are most common methods of storage. Moisture proof containers are ideal. Air conditioned storage should maintain temperatures of 10-22°C and less than 60% relative humidity. To avoid the fungal contamination during the storage, the crop is treated with suitable chemicals at the beginning of the storage process.

SUNFLOWER

Next to soybean and groundnut, sunflower (Helianthus annuus) is the third most important oilseed crop of the world. Sunflower performs well in most temperate regions of the world, with significant production occurring in each of the six crop producing continents. Its wide adaptability to wide ranging agro-climatic conditions and soil types are the major positive factors. It is the fourth important oilseed crop in India next to groundnut, rapeseed-mustard and soybean. Sunflower, as an oilseed crop, was introduced into India in 1969 and has emerged as a promising oilseed crop with great potential.

The favourable features for the phenomenal growth of sunflower in India are:

* Wide adaptability of the crop to a wide range of agro-climatic conditions and soil types.

* Photoperiod insensitivity overcoming seasonal restriction for its cultivation

* Short duration (75-100 days)

* High yield potential of seed and oil

* High quality edible oil (high PUFA-Poly unsaturated fatty acids)

¢ High seed multiplication ratio (>1:80)

* Easier and cheaper cultivation of the crop (low seed rate, no specialized operations, low water requirement)

¢ Remunerative market price

* Non-branched determinate plant type with single head

The cultivated sunflower is a native of Southern United States and Mexico, from where it was taken to Spain before the middle of the 16th century. In the 19th century, the cultivation of sunflower as an oilseed crop began in the Soviet Union and the majority of the present day varieties grown all over the world trace back their origin to former USSR. Sunflower as a cultivated plant was reintroduced to North America from Europe in the late 19th century. Though the origin and initial adaptation of the crop was in temperate regions, only during later part of 20th century, the crop was introduced to India and with the efforts of crop improvement and production, the crop has stabilized in the sub-tropics.

Sunflower oil is generally considered a premium oil compared to most other vegetable oils because of its light colour, bland flavour, high smoke point, high level of linoleic acid and absence of linolenic acid. The oil extracted from the seed contributes about 80% of the total value of the crop. The seed contains the oil varying from 48-

1151

53% and in our country it varies from 35 to 43%. The unsaturated fatty acids such as, oleic and linoleic, comprise about 90% of the total. The primary use of sunflower oil is as a salad and cooking oil and as a major ingredient in some margarine and shortening products. High oleic sunflower seeds are used for confectionery purposes. Sunflower oil has good keeping quality. Sunflower meal, rich in protein and vitamin-B complex, is a good animal feed. Sunflower hulls are also used in animal feeds as a source of roughage; as a fuel to generate steam or electricity and in production of furfural and ethyl alcohol. Other possible uses include building or insulation board, fire place logs and litter for livestock or poultry.

Sunflower belongs to the family Compositae and the genus Helianthus. The cultivated sunflower (H. annuus) is a diploid with chromosome number, 2n=34. The cultivated genotypes are characterized by a single stem terminating in a capitulum. Sunflower is protandrous, in which the male and female elements mature at different times. There appears to be a time-lag of 18-24 hours in the maturity of the male and female elements. So it is essentially a cross-pollinated plant, besides showing varying degrees of self-incompatibility. The head is heliotropic until the majority of flowers are fertilized, after which it generally remains fixed facing easterly. This movement is the reason for the plant’s common name sunflower and is related to auxin level and distribution in actively growing plant parts.

Sunflower in the world is cultivated in an area of 23.70 million hectares with production of 31.33 million tonnes and a productivity level of 1,322 kg/ha (2006). Russian Federation is the largest producer of sunflower having largest sunflower- growing area in the world. The other major sunflower-producing countries are Argentina, Ukrain, USA, Romania and Spain. The area under sunflower in India is about 1.91 million hectares and the total production is about 1.46 million tonnes (2007- 08). Karnataka, Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh are the major sunflower-producing states in India. It is also grown in Punjab, Haryana, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal. The productivity of sunflower in Punjab, Haryana and Tamil Nadu is about 1,700 kg/ha. Sunflower area, production and productivity showed an annual compound growth rates of 9.07, 8.74 and - 0.30% during the period 1970-71 to 2006-07.

Climate and soil

The crop requires a cool climate during germination and seedling growth, warm weather from seedling stage up to flowering, and non-cloudy, sunny days during flowering to maturity. A good crop of sunflower can be taken in areas with rainfall of 300-500 mm. High temperatures above 38°C during post-anthesis period reduces seed yield and oil content.

The crop can thrive well in a variety of soils. It performs well in deep, neutral and well-drained light as well as heavy soils. The optimum pH of the soils for this crop is 6.5 to 8.5. It performs better than groundnut in heavy black cotton soils of Tamil Nadu and Karnataka.

Cropping systems

Sunflower forms an ideal component in many multiple cropping systems. Wider adaptability of the crop to different agro-climatic conditions and seasons, short duration and non-branching and flexible nature of the crop provides an opportunity to include

1152

1153

OILSEED CROPS

((Table 33.18 concluded)

F, Fodder; I, irrigated

it in intercropping and sequence cropping with the major crops and cropping systems of different regions (Table 33.18).

Cultivation

Land preparation: In light-textured soils, ploughing once or twice to a depth of 25-30 cm, followed by planking or harrowing twice is required for obtaining desired and weed-free seed-bed. Wherever soils are medium to heavy textured, harrowing once or twice immediately after rains, and/or when soil moisture is favourable is desirable. After the tillage and levelling, the land can be laid into ridges and furrows to the required row spacing, using a tractor-or bullock-drawn ridger.

Varieties/hybrids: Choice of appropriate variety/hybrid is very important for realizing higher sunflower yield (Table 33.19).

Sowing time: Sowing time should be decided in such a way that the flowering and seed filling stages of the crop do not coincide with continuous rainy period or high temperatures above 38°C.

Heavy soil areas : Second fortnight of August

1154 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

1154

achieve the desired plant stand. Due to uncertainty of adequate soil moisture in the seed zone and germinability of seed lower than the prescribed standard, it is safer to go in for higher seed rates and then thin out the excess seedlings to achieve optimum plant population.

The optimum spacing for sunflower is 60 cm between rows and 30 cm between plants which can accommodate 55,555 plants/ha. For short duration and dwarf varieties like Morden, 45 cm x 30 cm spacing may be followed.

Presoaking and seed treatment: For quick germination and better stand establishment in dryland conditions, soak the seed in fresh water (1 : 1 w/v) for about 14 hours and shade dry. Seed should be treated with Thiram or Captan @ 2-3 g/kg of seed to protect from seed-borne diseases. Seed treatment with Metalaxyl @ 6 g/kg can protect the crop against downy mildew disease. Treat the seed with Imidacloprid @ 5 or 6 g/kg seed before sowing against insect vectors.

Thinning: This simple low cost practice is generally neglected by the farmers in most of the regions. Though sunflower has wide plasticity for variation in plant population, it is highly susceptible to competition from more than one plant per hill.

1155

OILSEED CROPS

Maintenance of optimum population by judicious thinning at 10-15 days after germination to maintain single healthy plant per hill is essential for obtaining higher yields, besides easy interculture and crop management.

Manures and fertilizers: Sunflower is a fast growing and high oil-yielding crop and thus it is expected to take more nutrients. The low productivity of the crop in India in traditional areas is mainly ascribed to cultivation in low fertile marginal lands without proper fertilization apart from cultivation in drylands.

Incorporate 7-8 tonnes of well-decomposed FYM/compost/ha 2-3 weeks prior to sowing. It is better to apply fertilizers based on soil test.

; Apply 50% of the nitrogen and entire dose of P and K while planting preferably in the form of band placement. In drylands, topdress rest of the nitrogen at/around 30 days of crop growth depending on rainfall and soil moisture preferably at the time of interculture. For the irrigated crop, apply the remaining nitrogen in two equal splits first at 30 days after sowing (DAS) and the second at 15 days thereafter.

For intercropping systems involving sunflower, it is advisable to apply 100% recommended dose of fertilizer to both main and intercrop based on the area occupied by each component in the system.

In soils low to medium in available sulphur, sunflower responds well to sulphur fertilization. Application of 20-45 kg S/ha besides increasing seed yields also increases oil content in seeds. Application of recommended phosphorus through single super phosphate takes care of the sulphur needs of sunflower also.

Providing directed spray of borax (0.2%, i.e. 2 g/litre of water) to capitulum at ray floret opening stage increases seed filling, yield and oil content. A spray mixture of 500 litres/ha is required. Dissolve required quantity of borax (2 g/litre) in small quantity of hot water and make up the required volume. Alternatively, Solubar may be used directly at the recommended concentration.

Weed management: Provide two hoeings followed by one hand weeding at an interval of 15 days commencing from 15-20 DAS. Alternatively, use of Alachlor or Pendimethalin or Fluchloralin at the rate of 1.5 kg a.i./ha in 600 litres of water as pre- emergence spray on the same evening after sowing (ensure enough soil moisture at the time of weedicide spray) followed by one hand weeding and interculture at 35 DAS provide effective control of weeds. Earthing up may be done when the crop is 60-70 cm tall when sown in flat bed to prevent lodging.

Irrigation: Irrigation should be provided at an interval of 8-10 days in case of light textured soils and 15-25 days in heavy textured soils. Whenever irrigation water is a constraint, provide irrigation at critical crop growth stage, viz. bud initiation (35-40 DAS), flower opening (55-65 DAS) and seed filling (65-80 DAS) for realizing maximum yield. Avoid moisture stress at these growth stages.

Supplemental pollination: Whenever bee activity is low, resort to supplemental hand pollination on alternate days preferably in the morning hours between 8 and 11 am for about two weeks. Hand pollination can be done by covering the hands with muslin cloth and gently rubbing the heads with palm and also touching the neighbouring plants. Maintaining 5 bee hives/ha provides optimum requirement of pollination, besides yielding valuable honey. Do not resort to insecticidal spray during flowering period as it affects the visit of honeybees.

1156

Insect-pests and diseases

Seedling pests, capitulum borer, foliage pests and sucking pests are the major groups of insect-pests on sunflower (Table 33.20).

Diseases

Among diseases, Alternaria leaf blight, rust, root and collar rot, downy mildew, head rot and necrosis are important (Table 33.21).

Bird damage

Birds, particularly parrots, pose serious problem to sunflower when it is raised in isolated and stray pockets. To minimize damage from birds, take up sunflower in large contiguous blocks. Safeguard the crop from bird damage during the period from seed filling to harvest through effective bird scaring particularly in the morning and evening hours. Tying bright reflector ribbons above the crop will support to scare away the birds. In addition to birds, rats and squirrels also cause considerable damage to plant establishment by picking the seeds after sowing. Manual watch to scare these rodents and birds ensures good crop stand establishment.

Harvesting and threshing

Sunflower can be harvested at physiological maturity when the back of the head turns to Jemon yellow colour and the bottom leaves start drying and withering. After separation of the heads, dry them for 2-3 days to facilitate easy separation of seed.

1157

OILSEED CROPS

Thresh either by beating with sticks or rubbing or through special manual or power- operated threshers now available for the purpose. Dry the seed well before storage so as to bring the moisture content to around 9-10%.

Yield potential

By adopting the recommended package of practices, in rainfed area, average yied ranges from 800 to 1,000 kg/ha in assured rainfall areas from 1,000 to 1,500 kg/ha and in irrigated areas from 2,000 to 2,500 kg/ha.

Some critical Do’s and Don’ts

* Continuous cropping of sunflower year after year in the same field should be avoided.

* Take up sunflower plantings in such a way that flowering does not coincide with heavy rainfall period in coastal belt and avoid cultivation of sunflower in kharif.

* The incidence of virus disease is less if sown after 15 August.

‘Avoid low lying areas for sunflower cultivation.

* Always use certified seed obtained from authorised seed producing/supplying agencies.

* Always treat the seeds with recommended pesticides before sowing.

+ Always maintain optimum plant stand recommended for particular region. Maintain one seedling per hill by thinning at 15-18 days after sowing.

* Use presoaked seeds wherever soil moisture in the seed zone is insufficient at planting time.

1158

* Incorporate FYM or compost 2 to 3 weeks before sowing.

* Keep sunflower field “weed free” through recommended cultural/chemical weed control practices during first 45 days of crop period.

In the event of moisture stress, irrigate the crop at the critical stages, i.e. bud, flowering and seed development stages.

Spray boron @ 0.2% at ray floret opening stage.

Do not spray insecticides during the flowering period.

Wherever bee activity is low, resort to hand pollination.

Protect the predators such as coccinellids and chrysoperla.

Plant-protection measures to be taken based on the need and in endemic areas preventive measures must be taken.

In saline soils, sunflower should be sown on ridges and additional 20 kg N/ha to be applied.

SESAME

Sesame or gingelly (Sesamum indicum) commonly known as ¢i/ (Hindi) is an ancient oilseed crop grown in India, and perhaps the oldest oilseed crop in the world. The crop is now grown in a wide range of environments, extending from semi-arid tropics and subtropics to temperate regions. Consequently, the crop has a large diversity in cultivars and cultural systems. India is the largest producer of sesame in the world. It also ranks first in the world in terms of sesame-growing area (24%).

Many authors have described archaeological evidence to show that sesame was a highly prized oil crop in Babylon and Assyria, 4000 years ago or even earlier. The primary centre of origin could be placed in the fertile crescent, or the Indian sub- continent or in the Iran-Afghanistan area. Since most of the wild species in the genus are located in Africa, it has been suggested that Ethiopia is the centre of origin from where it spread eastward along the ancient trade routes.

Sesame seed is a rich source of edible oil. Its oil content generally varies from 46 to 52% and protein content between 20 and 26%. Its seeds may be eaten fried, mixed with sugar or in the form of sweat meats. Sesame oil is used as a cooking oil in southern India. It is also used for anointing the body, for manufacturing perfurmed oils and for medicinal purposes. Sesame cake is a rich source of protein, carbohydrates and minerals, such as calcium and phosphorus. The cake is edible and is eaten widely by working classes. It is also a valuable and nutritious feed for milch cattle.

The fatty acid composition of sesame oil reveals that linoleic, oleic, palmitic and stearic acids are the major constituents. The oil is highly resistant to oxidative rancidity and exerts synergistic effect on the action of certain insecticides like pyrethrins and rotenone.

India exports sizeable quantity of sesame seeds to different countries. During 2007- 08, about 324,700 tonnes of sesame seeds and extractions were exported, earning valuable foreign exchange of more than Rs 1,679 crores.

Sesame belongs to the family Pedaliaceae and has 36 species. The cultivated species S. indicum is a diploid having the chromosome number, 2n=26. Sesame is an erect and annual herb. The plant is simple or branched. The leaves are opposite below and alternate above. The flowers are zygomorphic, solitary, or three together, axillary, short-pedicelled, bore on the upper part of the stem or branches, geniculate, the tube

1159

OILSEED CROPS

is bent downwards and is dilated above the oblique base. The calyx is small and five- sectioned, 0.5-0.6 cm long. The corolla is tubular, campanulate, approximately 3 cm long, with applicate margin and slightly bilabiate, the upper lip is entire and the lower one is tripartite. There are four functional stamens and often one is sterile, didynamous. The anthers are sagittate. The ovary is superior, bilocular, but may be subdivided by false internal walls. The fruit is a capsule, erect and oblong. The capsule contains numerous small ovate seeds. The testa may be smooth or reticulate and may be white, yellow, reddish brown or black. The seed is dicotyledonous, albuminous and oleaginous.

Sesame is considered as a self-pollinated crop giving full seed set under isolation. However, the flowers attract insects and their activity can lead to different rates of cross pollination from a commonly reported few per cent to as high as 65%.

Distribution, area and production

Sesame is grown in the tropical to the temperate zones, from about 40°N latitude to 40°S latitude. Sesame is grown in an area of 7.54 million hectares with a production of 3.34 million tonnes in the world with a productivity of 443 kg/ha (2006). China, Myanmar and Sudan account for 40% of the world’s sesame production. In India, sesame is grown in about 1.80 million hectares with a total production of 0.76 million tonnes and productivity of 422 kg/ha (2007-08). West Bengal alone accounts for 25% of the total sesame production in India. The other major sesame-producing states are Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. The crop has recorded annual compound growth rate of -0.56, 0.77 and 1.34% in area, production and productivity during 1966-67 to 2006-07.

Climate and soil

Sesame is grown in the plains and also at elevations up to 1,200 m. It cannot stand frost, continued heavy rains or prolonged drought. It is grown in sandy-loam to heavy black soils. Most of the crop is confined to lighter soils and its cultivation in heavy soils is limited to certain regions. The pH of sesame-growing soils ranges from 5.5 to 8.2. The sesame-growing soils are shallow to medium in Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Mahdhya Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, and are deep in Rajasthan, Gujarat and Maharashtra.

Cropping systems

Sesame being a short duration crop, fits well into a number of sequence and intercropping systems (Table 33.22).

Cultivation

Season: Sesame is grown in India in kharif, semi-rabi and summer seasons or more than one season in some states; such as kharif and rabi in parts of Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Orissa; summer crop after late paddy or potato in West Bengal, Bihar and Orissa and in all the seasons in parts of southern India.

Land preparation: For good germination and establishment of desired plant stand, sesame requires well pulverised seed-bed with fine tilth. To ensure this, plough the land once or twice followed by 2 or 3 harrowings for obtaining desired seed-bed. Keep the field weed-free and perfectly levelled as waterlogged conditions even for

1160

short periods would result in death of plants. Immediately prior to planting, land should be harrowed to kill weed growth, since sesame seedlings grow slowly initially.

Varieties: Sesame is highly sensitive to seasonal variations in terms of day length and temperature. Therefore, varieties recommended for commercial cultivation are location- and season-specific (Table 33.23).

For Meghalaya, Manipur, Nagaland, Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh and also Andaman Nicobar Islands, variety B 67 is recommended on the basis of

1161

OILSEED CROPS

State Varieties Andhra Pradesh Gauri, Madhavi, Rajeshwari, Yellamanchili 1, Yellamanchili 2, Swetha Til, JCS 94, Hima Asom Madhavi, Gauri, RS 1, RT 1, ST 1683, OMT 11-6-3, Amit, SWB 32-10 Bihar Krishna, B 63, Kanke White, OMT 11-6-3, Amit, SWB 32-10 Gujarat Parva 1, Gujarat Til 1, Gujarat Til 2, Gujarat Til 10 Haryana Haryana Til 1, RT 46 Himachal Pradesh Brijeshwari Karnataka E 8, DG 1, TMV 3, Co1 Kerala Kayankulam 1, Thilothama, Soma, Surya, Thilak, Thiladhara, Thilarani Madhya Pradesh N32, JT7, JT 21, TKG 22, TKG 55, JTS 8, RT 46, Rama, TKG 306, TKG 308, PKDS 11, PKDS 12, PKDS 14, SWB 3210 Maharashtra Phule Til 1, N 8, Tapi (JLT 7), JLT 26, AKT 64, AKT 101 Orissa T 85, Vinayaka, Kanak, Kalika, Uma, Usha, Nirmala, Prachi, Amit Punjab TC 25, Punjab Til 1, TC 289 Rajasthan Pratap, RT 46, RT 54, RT 125, RT 103, RT 127 Tamil Nadu TMV 3, TMV 4, TMV 5, TMV 6, Co 1, TSS 6, Paiyur 1, VRI1 Uttar Pradesh T 4, T 12, T 13, T 78, MT 75, RT 46, SWB 32-10 West Bengal Rama (Imp. Sel. 8), Tilothama (B 67), Amit, SWB 32-10

recommendations of adjoining states. Similarly, for Puducherry, variety Co 1 is recommended.

Seed rate and spacing: Sesame is usually broadcast. For easy interculture and to realize higher yields, adopt line sowing. A seed rate of 4-7 kg/ha is adequate to achieve the required plant stand. Wherever seed drills are used as in Maharashtra, the above seed rate may be reduced to 2.5 to 3 kg/ha. The spacing recommended for sesame in different regions of the country varies from 22.5 to 45 cm between rows and 10 to 22.5 cm between plants in the row.

Thinning should be done scrupulously to ensure recommended plant spacing within a row. The first thinning is to be done invariably 14 days after sowing and the second thinning 21 days after sowing. Excess population adversely affects growth and yield of crop. Early thinning will facilitate good establishment and proper use of fertilizers.

Seed treatment and sowing: Seeds should be treated with Thiram or Captan @ 2.5 g/kg seed or Dithane M-45 @ 3 g/kg of seed for prevention of seed-borne diseases. Where bacterial leaf spot disease is a problem, the seed should be soaked for 30 minutes in solution of Agrimicin 100 (0.025%) and wettable cersason (0.05%) for 6 hr prior to seeding.

The seed rate and seed size being small, seeds are mixed with sand, soil or ash to increase the volume handled and to assist in even distribution. Occasionally, dry powdered manure and old seed that has lost viability is used. For sowing in rows, seed drills may be used. The seeds should be placed shallow to get proper germination and plant stand.

Time of sowing: Proper time of sowing is a must for getting higher yield. Generally, higher yields are recorded with sowing immediately after first rains in kharif,’ Very early sowing in kharif season in some cases has been found to enhance the incidence of phyllody and delayed sowing beyond mid-July reduces yield at many places (Table 33.24).

1162

Nutrient management: Sesame is generally grown on residual fertility in India. But to get good yields, it is essential that the crop is adequately fertilized. Sesame responds well to fertilizers. The level of nutrients would, however, vary depending on the variety, crop, season, soil, fertility status, previous crop, rainfall and soil moisture. As a general practice, it is suggested to apply 10 tonnes/ha of well-decomposed farmyard manure before last ploughing to improve soil physical conditions and obtain higher yields. The recommended fertilizer dose (Table 33.25) must be applied at the time of planting under rainfed conditions.

In areas deficient in sulphur, application of 15-30 kg S/ha is recommended at the time of sowing. If phosphorus is applied through single super phosphate, sulphur needs are automatically taken care of. There is also possibility of substituting part of fertilizer N (50%) amounting to 20 kg/ha through seed treatment with Azospirillum.

Weed management: The slow initial growth of sesame seedlings makes them poor competitors to many quick-growing tropical weeds. Therefore, the crop is very sensitive to weed competition during the first 20-25 days. A weed-free seed-bed is the most important, since cultivation of sesame seedlings is difficult as its fine fibrous roots are easily damaged. A minimum of two weedings, one 15 days after sowing and another 15-20 days thereafter are required to keep the fields weed-free and make moisture and nutrients available to the crop. For interculture, use hand-hoes or bullock-drawn blade harrow, rotary or finger weeder provided they are set to work as shallow as possible.

Weeds can also be controlled effectively by use of proper herbicides. Diuron @ 400-600 g/ha or Basalin @ 1 kg a.i/ha or Alachlor @ 1.75 kg a.i./ha or Fluchloralin

1163

OILSEED CROPS

@ 1 kg a.i./ha or Pendimethalin @ 1 kg a.i/ha as pre-emergence treatment has been found effective for controlling weeds. Chemical method may be resorted wherever weed growth is severe and labour is scarce, followed by one hand-weeding, if required around 30 days after sowing. Band spraying plus inter-row cultivation is a combination that most frequently gives good weed control at a relatively low cost.

Water management: Sesame grown during rabi/summer season is normally raised under irrigation. Kharif crop rarely receives urigation. Nevertheless, protective irrigation will greatly benefit the kharif crop whenever there are prolonged dry spells. Highest sesame yields are obtained when grown under irrigation in arid regions, where the sunny dry climate is suitable. For irrigated rabi/summer crop of sesame, the irrigation may be given if soil moisture conditions warrant, immediately after sowing so as to improve germination and stand establishment. The subsequent irrigations may be given at intervals of 12-15 days depending on the soil type, weather conditions

1164

and season. For good capsule filling and yield, irrigations at flower initiation and capsule formation stages are most critical.

Free flooding and border strip methods of irrigation are normally employed for irrigating sesame in India. Out of these methods, border strip method of irrigation is beneficial and economical.

Sesame is attacked by a number of insect-pests and diseases. Development and use of resistant varieties is perhaps the most economical method of reducing the losses.

Insect-pests

Sesame is infested by as many as 29 insect-pests belonging to 8 species which are potential pests of the crop (Table 33.26).

Diseases

There are number of fungal, bacterial, mycoplasma and viral diseases responsible for reduction in sesame yields (Table 33.27).

Sesame crop should be harvested when the leaves turn yellow and start dropping while the capsules are still greenish-yellow. The plants are usually stacked to allow the plants to dry. The crop is usually threshed by gentle beating of well-dried plants with sticks. The seeds should be cleaned and may be fumigated with hydrogen-cyanide to protect from storage insects.

1165

OILSEED CROPS

Foliar spray of 0.2% wettable sulphur (Sulfex) at flowering to capsule formation stage.

Seed treatment with Captan (0.25%), Bavistin (0.1%) or Thiram (0.25%).

Foliar spray with Topsin-M (0.1%), Bavistin (0.05%), Zineb (0.25%) or Mancozeb (0.25%) as and when symptoms are noticed. Give two more sprays at 10 days interval.

1166 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

Yield potential

The yield of sesame varies with season, method of cultivation and variety and varies from a few hundred to 3,000 kg/ha in different countries. In India, according to season, 375-500 kg/ha during kharif and 500-750 kg/ha during rabi may be expected. According to method of cultivation, 500-600 kg/ha under rainfed conditions and 900- 1,000 kg/ha under irrigation may be obtained.

Seed storage

Bulk storage of sesame seed presents few problems provided the seed is clean and dry. Seed that heats or is contaminated by extraneous material produces discoloured or rancid oil. Storage methods and containers by farmers can be varied, often ingenious, for sesame seeds are readily attacked by a number of insects.

SAFFLOWER

Safflower (Carthamus tinctorius), commonly known as kusum (Hindi), is an important rabi oilseed crop of our country. India is the largest producer of safflower in the world. Worldwide, safflower is comparatively a minor oilseed crop, being limited in its distribution by constraints of environment and the plant’s spiny nature. The plant has been cultivated for centuries in India either for its orange red dye extracted from its brilliantly coloured florets and/or for its much-valued oil. With the advent of synthetic dyes and food colourants at the beginning of 20th century, the crop is now grown mainly for edible oil obtained from seed. This has led to disappearance of the crop from its traditional centres of cultivation in north and north-eastern parts of the country, and is now mainly cultivated in the peninsular region.

Based on the existence of its closely related species, it was believed to be originated in an area bounded by the eastern Mediterranean and persian Gulf, encompassing southern parts of former USSR, Western Iran, Iraq, Syria, Southern Turkey, Jordan and Israel. At an early stage of evolution, it spread to Egypt, Ethiopia, southern Europe, South Asia and Far East where distinctive types have evolved.

Dried red or orange flowers are still sold as substitute for saffron in the markets of Middle East and are used to colour foods and beverages. Safflower petal is used for tea and in a number of medicinal preparations in China. Safflower produces oil rich in polyunsaturated fatty acids (linoleic acid 78%) which play an important role in reducing blood cholesterol level. Being a very good cooking oil, it is used in the preparations of margarine, mayonnaise and salad dressings. The oil is also used in the manufacture of paints, varnishes and linoleum. Undecorticated safflower cake is generally used as manure and decorticated safflower cake is used as cattle-feed. It is also used as poultry- feed after fortification with lysine and methionine. Safflower hulls can be used in the manufacturing cellulose, hard boards and as fuel. Young safflower seedlings, thinnings, prunings are used as green vegetable and as pot herb. Green safflower plant is a good fodder for animals. It can also be used after converting into silage.

The genus Carthamus has 25 species with 10, 11, 12, 22 and 32 pairs of chromosomes. Only Carthamus tinctorius is cultivated and all other species are wild and weedy in nature. The safflower plant is highly branched, herbaceous, thistle-like annual, varying in height from 30 to 150 cm. The leaves are either spiny or non-spiny. It has many branches, each terminating in a flower. The inflorescence is broad, flat or

1167

OILSEED CROPS

slightly curved and densely bristled owing to the presence of numerous floral bracts. The flowers are yellow to red, containing 20 to 100 individual florets, each of which producing a seed. Seeds mature in 4-5 weeks from flowering. Seeds contain 28-32% oil. Safflower is often cross pollinated crop with 4 to 20% cross pollination. Bees or other insects are generally necessary for optimum fertilization and maximum yields.

Distribution, area and production

The world safflower area and production are 0.82 million hectares and 0.58 million tonnes, respectively, with a productivity level of 709 kg/ha (2006). The important safflower-growing countries besides India are, the USA, China, Mexico, Ethiopia, Australia and Argentina. In India, it is raised over an area of 3.20 lakh hectares witha production 2.24 lakh tonnes and productivity of 701 kg/ha (2007-08). Maharashtra is the highest producer of safflower (69%) from the largest growing area (72%) followed by Karnataka (25% in production and 22% in area). The other minor safflower- producing states are Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Chhattisgarh and Bihar. The area, production and productivity of safflower recorded annual compound growth rates of -0.73, 1.98 and 2.73% between 1965-66 and 2006-07.

Climate and soil

Safflower is adapted to a wide range of climates. It is more or less day-neutral but is thermosensitive. It does not favour extremes of either heat or cold. The crop is tolerant to low temperatures at seedling and vegetative stages but sensitive at elongation, flowering and post-flowering stages. Safflower comes up better in relatively drier areas. It cannot withstand excessive rainfall or humidity at any stage of its growth due to damage from fungal diseases. Frequent and prolonged rains and heavy dew at flowering stage adversely affect pollination, seed development, causing discolouration of the seed.

Safflower requires fertile, fairly deep and well-drained soils with pH range of 5-8. Irrespective of their fertility, shallow soils seldom produce high yields due to insufficient moisture. Shallow sandy soils are not suitable for safflower. Heavy soils with poor drainage must also be avoided for growing safflower specially under irrigation. Safflower is considered to be salt-tolerant specially to sodium salts but less tolerant to Ca and Mg.

Cropping systems

Safflower can fit well in many crop sequences and also as a component in intercropping systems (Table 33.28).

Cultivation

Tillage and seed-bed preparation: Safflower requires clod-free seed-bed with a firm subsoil and adequate moisture for good germination and stand establishment. In monocropped black soils of rabi areas, harrowing 3 to 4 times during the monsoon is as effective as deep ploughing or sub-soiling to keep fields weed-free. If the fields are infested with obnoxious weeds, resort to deep ploughing during summer as soon as the rabi crop is harvested. Conserve maximum amount of soil moisture and ensure the desired seed-bed. When safflower is to be planted after a short-duration cereal or

1168

1168 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

legume, avoid too deep or repeated tillage after the harvest of the kharif crops as it would result in loss of conserved moisture. If conditions warrant (prefer zero tillage wherever possible) give 1 or 2 harrowings (Deccan rabi) or shallow ploughing/disking followed by planking/harrowing (clay loams, alluvials, sandy loams etc.) immediately

(Contd. . .)

1169

OILSEED CROPS

(Table 33.28 concluded)

*As a contingent practice depending on timely receipt and/or availability of favourable soil moisture conditions; **as a contingent practice or alternatively with pre-plant irrigation if condi- tions warrant.

after harvest of kharif crops. Keeping kharif crops weed-free will minimise tillage requirements for safflower.

Seeding time: The optimum time of seeding stipulated for different safflower- growing areas taking advantage of first soaking rains received in September/October (Table 33.29).

Varieties: A large number of high-yielding varieties have been developed and recommended, besides, five safflower hybrids (Table 33.30).

Seed rate and spacing: Safflower has considerable plasticity to seeding rates and row spacings because of its inherently superior branching potentials. Optimum plant population in different varieties seldom exceeds | 10,000/ha even under ideal conditions. Wherever safflower is taken as a sequence crop after short-duration cereals and pulses, increase the seed rate by about 50% to obtain satisfactory stands.

Seeding depth and devices: For better stands, follow line sowing using improved seed drills or fertilizer-cum-seed drills available in different regions. Seeds can be sown behind the ploughalso. Place the seed ata depth ofabout 5 cmin the moist zone to facilitate good germination and emergence. Cover the seed with a heavy plank. In scarcity zone of Maharashtra, border method of planting (skipping one row after every two rows and opening a furrow in the skipped row) and in Telangana region, tied ridges and furrows system and closing furrow every 10m helps in better soil moisture conservation.

1170

Many a times, establishment of optimum stand is a serious problem in several non- traditional areas such as in Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Orissa and North-western India. Under such a situation, devices which could place the seed in the moist zone as for example single row dryland deep-furrow seeder or corn planter with adjustable row opener in plateau region of Jharkhand, Malavya seed drill in eastern Uttar Pradesh should be preferred.

Thinning: Thin the excess seedlings within 10-15 days after emergence and maintain the desired plant-to-plant spacing. This practice is very important to realize the potential yield but is generally neglected by the farmers.

Nutrient management: Safflower requires adequate supply of nutrients for good yields. Fertilizer recommendation depends on soil test and expected yields (Table 33.31).

In double-cropped areas, the recommended dose of nitrogen to safflower can be reduced by 50% (about 15 to 25 kg N/ha), if the preceding crop is a grain-legume like mungbean receiving its full complement of fertilizers. It is advisable to apply phosphorus and potassium based on soil-test values.

In scanty rainfall areas of Maharashtra, an additional top dressing of 20 to 25 kg N/ ha should be given, if seasonal conditions turn out to be very favourable.

In rainfed areas, apply entire quantity of fertilizers as basal dose by drilling. Place

1171

OILSEED CROPS

the fertilizers deep in seed-furrows (10 cm below the soil in traditional area and 10-15 cm in other areas). In the traditional single-cropped rabi tracts of Maharashtra and Karnataka, application of fertilizers 2 to 3 weeks prior to optimum planting time is recommended for maximum efficiency under receding soil moisture.

In irrigated areas, apply 50% of N and 100% of P and K fertilizers at the time of seeding and top dress the remaining 50% N after 5 weeks at the time of first irrigation.

Safflower also responds to sulphur in soils with low to medium available sulphur. Apply 15 to 30 kg S/ha before planting. If phosphorus is applied through single super phosphate, sulphur needs of crop can also be met.

Seed treatment with Azotobacter or mixed inoculation of Azotobacter and Azospirillum (25 g/kg seed) could effectively substitute 50% of recommended N needs of safflower amounting to 20 kg/ha under rainfed conditions in almost all the safflower- growing regions of the country. For intercropping systems involving safflower, application of 100% recommended fertilizer to main as well as intercrop based on the area occupied by each crop in the system is advocated to get maximum returns.

Weeding and interculture: Normally, weeds do not pose any serious problem in safflower except when frequent rains are received during initial phases of crop growth

1172

or when land preparation and tillage are not proper. Safflower is very susceptible to weed competition during its rosette stage which lasts for about 25-30 days in peninsular India and 50-60 days or more in other regions with prolonged winter. Timely weeding and interculture during this period is crucial for arresting weed growth and obtain full benefits from applied nutrients, rainfall and soil moisture.Give one or two hand weedings and hoeings/harrowings at 25 to 30 and 45 to 50 days after planting depending on the length of rosette period and the severity of weed infestation. Pre-emergence application of Oxadiazon | kg a.i./ha or pre-plant incorporation of Flucloralin or Trifluralin 1 kg a.i./ha have been found quite effective. In black soil areas, cracks begin to appear from December onwards with the loss of sub-soil moisture. To delay cracking, close them superficially with dust mulch as and when they appear and thereby minimize moisture losses. Give one additional interculture or hoeing using bullock- drawn hoes/harrows/sweeps in December before the crop canopy is closed and the spines become problematic.

Irrigation and water management: Under scanty moisture conditions in drylands, yields can be boosted by 40 to 60% by providing just one life-saving irrigation (5 to 8 cm) at critical phases of crop growth (early stem elongation or flowering) or before soil moisture becomes limiting for crop growth. When raised as an irrigated crop, safflower can give almost double the yield obtained from rainfed crop. The crop is, however, very sensitive to excessive moisture. In poorly drained soils like heavy black soils, improper surface irrigation may lead to prolonged water-logged conditions and the associated problems of wilts and root rots. Give a light presowing irrigation if the soil moisture in the seed zone is not adequate for germination. Later, depending on the soil moisture status, give one irrigation at 35 days after planting in early elongation

1173

OILSEED CROPS

stage and another at 65 to 70 days during flowering. After this, no irrigations are generally required unless soils are too light with low water-holding capacity. In light soils, about 5-6 irrigations are needed including a preplanting irrigation.

Insect-pests and diseases

Safflower is affected by a number of insect-pests and diseases although only a few of them are of economic importance (Table 33.32),

Bird damage

Birds, particularly parrots, pose a serious problem to safflower when it is raised in isolated pockets as in non-traditional areas. To minimize damage from birds, take up safflower cultivation in large contiguous blocks. Safeguard the crop from bird damage during the period from seed filling to physiological maturity which extends by about three weeks through effective bird scaring particularly in the morning and evening hours.

Harvesting and threshing

The crop is ready for harvest when the leaves and most of bracteoles become dry and brown. The crop is harvested by cutting the plants at the base with the help of a sickle during early hours. It is threshed either by beating with sticks or with the help of tractor and the seeds are winnowed. The threshing and cleaning operations can also be made with power-operated threshers. Combine harvesting is becoming popular wherever safflower is grown as a pure crop.

Realisable yield potentials with improved technology

If all the improved agro-production and potential technologies are followed, about 800 to 1,200 kg/ha of safflower yields can be obtained under scanty moisture conditions and about 1,500 to 2,000 kg/ha under favourable moisture conditions. Under minimal irrigation, yield levels of 2,000 to 2,800 kg/ha could be achieved.

1174

NIGER

Niger, although a minor oilseed crop in the world and national oil economy of India, is of considerable importance to tribal economy in many niger-growing states of India. Niger (Guizotia abyssinica) has its centre of gene variation and origin in the

1175

Ethiopian highlands north of 10°N latitude. Cultivated niger may have originated from the wild species Guizotia scabra subsp. schimperi due to selection by Ethiopian farmers thousands of years ago. From Ethiopia, it is believed to have migrated to the East African highlands and during the second millenium sc may have moved across to India with crops like finger millet. Niger’s wide dispersal in India is indicated by the great variety of local names for the plant and the seed.

Niger seed contains 35-40% edible oil. The oil contains 85% unsaturated and 15% saturated fatty acids. Linoleic and oleic acids are the major unsaturated ones. The raw niger oil is readily subject to oxidative rancidity rendering its keeping quality poor. The niger oil is used for culinary purposes and for manufacturing paints and soft soaps, lubricants and manufacturing cosmetics. It is mainly used for edible purpose. Niger seed-cake is a valuable cattle feed and manure. Niger is also used as a green manure. Niger seed is also exported to several western countries as a bird feed. During 2007-08, India exported around 22,000 tonnes of niger seed worth more than Rs 90 crores to different countries.

Guizotia belongs to the Compositae family, the tribe Helianthoides and the subtribe Verbesininae. It has six species, out of which abyssinica species is the cultivated one and it is a diploid (2n=30 chromosomes). It is an annual, highly branched herb, 35- 200 cm tall, with a well-developed root system. Two to three buds are formed close together at the tips of the branches, followed by the formation of buds in the axils of leaves. A single plant often bears 20-40 heads. The head consists of a receptacle | to 2 cm in diameter, surrounded by two rows of involucral bracts. Generally, eight ray florets form a showing outer whorl, light yellow to orange in colour. The ray florets are female and normally produce seeds. Each floret consists of a tube of five lobes with a distinct upper section surrounding the style and stamens and a lower section surrounding the ovary. It takes 40-45 days from flowering to maturity. The fruit is an achene, small, some 3-5 mm in length and 1.5 mm in width. There are usually 15-30 mature seeds/head. The oil content in seed varies from 35 to 40%. Niger is basically cross-pollinated, although some self pollination is known to occur. Insects are more important than wind as pollinators.

Distribution, area and production: Niger crop is mainly grown in Ethiopia and provides about 50 to 60% for that country’s edible oil. In India, it is grown in 4.08 lakh ha and the total production is 1.09 lakh tonnes with a productivity of 269 kg/ha (2007-08). It accounts for less than 0.4% of total oilseeds production in India. Orissa, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Chhattisgarh are the major niger-producing states and the other minor niger-producing states are Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Asom, West Bengal and Jharkhand. The crop recorded annual compound growth rates of -0.16, 0.69 and 0.85% in area, production and productivity between 1964-65 and 2006-07.

Climate and soil: Niger is a temperate-region crop that has also adopted to a semi- tropical environment. It is a short-day plant. It grows well between 200 and 2,500 m above main sea-level. Niger requires moderate temperatures of 18-23°C during growth and above 30°C, the rate of growth and flowering are adversely affected and it hastens maturity. Seed-bed temperature of 17-25°C is optimum and below 10°C impairs germination and above 35°C causes uneven emergence. A rainfall of 1,000-1,300 mm is considered optimum although 800 mm will produce a reasonable yield if it is well

1176

spread over the growing period. The peak flowering period of the crop should not coincide with the rainy period as the honey-bees which are the main pollinators of this crop are disturbed resulting in poor setting. The crop can withstand periods of very high soil moisture during vegetative phase and is also resistant to drought.

Niger can grow on wide range of soil types, but appears to thrive best in clay- loams and sandy-clays. Niger is grown extensively on marginal and sub-marginal lands in tribal areas on hill tops and slopes, although this crop thrives best on well- drained loamy soils of good depth and texture. The crop prefers light-textured soil and common heavy clays and black cotton soils are not suitable for niger. The optimum pH range is 5.2 — 7.3. Niger is extraordinarily resistant to poor oxygen supply in soils because of its ability to develop aerenchymas under these conditions.

Cropping systems: Niger is grown either as a sole crop or sown as mixed crop with various pulses and grain crops including millets in different states of India. However, the yield of niger as a sole crop is higher than as a mixed crop. Niger is generally grown as the only crop in a year. However, in certain situations, this crop is rotated with little millet (Panicum miliare), early finger millet, common millet (Panicum miliaceum) etc (Table 33.33).

Intercropping

Cultivation

Land preparation: Niger-seeds are small, therefore a level seed-bed is essential to ensure even depth of planting and subsequent emergence. Land preparation as that for small grains is suitable for niger also. Good tilth for sowing is obtained by one or two ploughings followed by two harrowings. It is essential that the furrows run across the slope to avoid soil erosion in the hill tops and sloppy areas.

Varieties: A large number of high-yielding varieties have been developed (Table 33,34),

Time of sowing: Optimum sowing time for kharif crop is from middle of June to early August, whereas rabi crop can be sown in September (Table 33.35).

Seed rate and spacing: The seed rate depends on the method of sowing. Generally,

1177

OILSEED CROPS

5-8 kg of seeds/ha is required when sown in pure stands. Row widths vary from 20 to 30 cm depending on soil moisture and amount of fertilizer applied. In low rainfall areas, the wider row-width should be chosen. When strip-cropped, it is often thinned after emergence to 15-20 cm between plants.

Method of sowing: The most usual method of sowing by farmers in India is by broadcasting. Seed is sometimes mixed with soil to assist in even distribution. The land is then harrowed to cover seed. Line sowing using seed drills is recommended. When mechanical planters or drills are used, the seed should be sown 1-3 cm deep, depending on soil type and amount of seed-bed moisture and up to 10 cm is possible in loose soils, in which case the drill-furrow should not be completely filled. Grain drills fitted with cross-sowing attachments, or precision seeders can be used to sow niger. Since the seed is small, a method of accurately adjusting seed flow is essential or seed can be mixed with sand or ash to give the required bulk. The seed should not be mixed with fertilizer,not even placed in contact with it in the seed-bed.

Seed must be sown into moist soil, but the level of available soil moisture adequate to sustain germination and emergence varies with soil type. A higher level is necessary in sandy soil than clay. Radicle elongation after germination of niger seed is faster in clay than in sandy soil. Niger germinates very quickly under optimum conditions, and can be above ground in 3-5 days.

Nutrient management: Niger is mostly grown on marginal and sub-marginal lands without manures and fertilizers. It appears that niger can benefit from species-specific

1178

Rhizobium inoculation to promote nitrogen production and uptake through root nodulation. It was suggested that mycorrhiza, which grow on the roots of plants, growing in the inoculated soil, contribute by increasing uptake of phosphate. This beneficial association may also explain why niger grows well on relatively infertile soils. About 20-40 kg N and P,O, are recommended for niger in most of the states (Table 33.36).

In sulphur-deficient areas, application of 15 kg S/ha through gypsum at the time of planting enhances seed yield and oil content.

The manures and fertilizers are generally broadcast in the field. Normally, entire quantity of P and half of N is applied at the time of sowing and the remaining half of N is top-dressed 30-35 days later when the plants are about 30 cm in height or when the first buds are noticed.

Weed management: Niger grows rapidly once the seedlings are established, and its dense growth allows it to compete with annual weeds, provided pre-planting operation have removed majority of weeds. Two weedings are generally sufficient. The first weeding should be done at the time of thinning, i.e. about 15 days after sowing. If required, second weeding is done before top-dressing with nitrogen just before first budding. In Orissa, dodder (Cuscuta chinensis) has become a problematic parasitic weed. As a precautionary measure, seeds should be obtained from cuscuta- free areas and if cuscutta seed is found mixed with niger, sowing should be done after separation of weed-seeds by sieving. The cuscuta weed can also be controlled by using selective herbicide (e.g. Pronamide @ 2 kg a.i./ha) as a pre-emergence soil treatment on the next day of sowing and as a post-emergence foliage treatment at 20 days after sowing.

Water management: Niger is invariably grown in the rainy season and it is seldom irrigated. Soil moisture stress during seedling stage affects growth of niger more severely than other stages. There are indications that niger yields can be doubled under irrigation, if the crop suffers from moisture stress. Irrigation may be given at the seedling stage for proper growth of the crop. Thereafter, irrigation may be given according to the needs of the crop. Check basin or border strip system of irrigation is ideal for niger.

Insect-pests and diseases

Niger is generally not menaced by any major insect-pests or diseases. However, some insect-pests and diseases may appear sporadically (Table 33.37).

1179

OILSEED CROPS

33.37 Insect-pests, diseases and weed of niger and their management

* Pre-sowing soil application of Basalin (1kg a.i./ha) or pre- emergence soil application of Pronamide (Kerb 50 w) @ 2 kg a.i/ha

Harvesting and threshing

Niger normally matures in about 80-145 days after emergence. Correct timing of harvesting of niger is an important practice in reducing shattering. Shattering can reduce the returns, up to 25% of seeds can be lost. The crop should be harvested when the leaves dry up and the head tums blackish. After drying in the sun for about a week by stacking on the threshing floor, the crop is threshed by beating with sticks.

Yield potential

Yield varies with the method of cultivation of niger. As a pure crop, 400-500 kg/ha could be obtained although yields up to 1,000 kg/ha have been recorded in

1180

demonstration plots. As an intercrop, the yield may range from 150 to 300 kg/ha depending on the crop and the row ratio.

Storage of seed

Niger seeds attract storage pests, and must be protected from them. After threshing, winnowing is done to clean seeds. The seeds are dried in sun for 2-3 days to bring down the moisture to 5%. Then they are stored in gunny bags in houses with good ventilation. However, there should not be high humidity and moisture inside the storage houses. For small-farm seed storage, 200 litres oil-drums fitted with lids have proved most effective.

CASTOR

India has the legitimate pride of being the largest producer of castor (Ricinus communis) in the world from the largest castor-growing acerage. In India, it is the major non- edible oil produced which contributes 3-4% of the total oilseeds production of the country. Besides meeting the domestic demands, India earns sizeable foreign exchange through the export of castor oil and its derivatives.

Castor is indigenous to Eastern Africa and native of Ethiopia. Few also believe of its polyphyletic origin with four centres of variability, viz. Afghanistan- former USSR region, Palestine-West Asia, Indio-China and Arabian peninsula. It was introduced to America by African slaves.

The oil content of the seed varies from 35 to 58%. The oil, due to unique hydroxy fatty acid-ricinoleic acid content, is one of the important non-edible industrial oils used for a number of products, viz. dyes, detergents, medicines, plastics, printing ink, linoleum, patent leather, ointment, polishes, surface paints, adhesives, lubricants and hydraulic fluids. There are more than 200 areas of use of castor oil and its derivatives. It is also a source of a number of synthetic flower scents and fruit flavour. Castor-cake is an excellent source of organic fertilizer. In eri silk-producing areas, leaves are fed to eri silkworms.

Castor belongs to the genus Ricinus, a member of the Euphorbiaceae. This genus is considered to be monotypic, and R. communis is the only species which includes many polymorphic types. The cultivated types are dwarf annuals.

The stem is erect, circular in section, partially hollow, smooth, glabrous, with good branching. The stem is marked by a number of well-defined nodes, from each of which a leaf arises. The lower internodes are shorter and their length increases with the height. Leaves are alternate, large, palmate with 5-11 lobes, acuminate, margins notched, serrate or indented. They are carried on long stout petioles. The inflorescences are borne terminally on the main and lateral branches. Flowers are large, in terminal sub-panicled racemes, monoecious, apetalous, the upper portion of the raceme being occupied by the female flowers and the lower by the male flowers. The fruit is a roundish glaucous capsule, with three projecting sides covered with tough spines or smooth, three-loculed and three-seeded. Seeds are albuminous, anatropous, broad, oval, compressed with a marked caruncle and longitudinal raphe. The testa is thin, brittle, varying in colour and mottling. Below the testa is the thin tegmen, covering the whitish oily endosperm containing the embryo.

Castor is normally cross-pollinated; wind being the major agent in the tropics.

1181

OILSEED CROPS

Castor seeds of some varieties may have a dormancy period of several months, but majority of the varieties and hybrids have no dormancy. Seeds remain viable for 2-3 years at room temperature after which it drops drastically.

Distribution, area and production

The world castor area and production are 1.26 million hectares and 1.14 million tonnes, respectively, with a productivity level of 902 kg/ha (2006). Besides India, the other castor-producing countries are China, Brazil, Paraguay, Thailand, Ethiopia and Pakistan. In India, it is grown in about 7.9 lakh ha with a production of 10.5 lakh tonnes and productivity of 1,339 kg/ha (2007-08). Gujarat alone produces about 67% of the total castor of our country from 50% of the area with a record productivity of about 2 tonnes/ha. The other castor-producing states are Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka and Orissa. Castor recorded annual compound growth rates of 0.89, 4.63 and 3.70% in area, production and productivity during the period 1950- 51 to 2006-07.

Climate and soil

Castor is tolerant to drought and grows well in relatively dry and warm regions, having a well-distributed rainfall of 50 to 75 cm. In heavy-rainfall areas, the crop puts on excessive vegetative growth and assumes a perennial habit. The crop cannot stand frost, but some annual varieties can grow even at altitudes of 1,200 to 2,100 m, like Nilgiris, if sown in March-April. Perennial varieties are grown at still higher altitudes for shade in coffee estates. Castor requires a moderately high temperature (20°-26° C), with low humidity throughout the growing season.

The crop comes up well on almost all types of well-drained soils, but it is generally grown on red sandy loams in peninsular India and on light alluvial soils in the northern states. Inferior soils, not fit for commercial and food crops, are often used for growing castor.

1182 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

Cropping systems

Crop sequences/rotations: A number of productive and remunerative cereal/legume- castor sequences are identified for different agro-ecological situations in the country (Table 33.38).

Intercropping: Castor is usually raised either as a sole crop or mixed crop (Table 33.39).

A.P., Andhra Pradesh; U.P., Uttar Pradesh

Cultivation

Seeding time: Time of sowing has a significant bearing on the ultimate yield and returns from castor. The most ideal time to sow kharif castor in drylands is immediately after the receipt of first rains from south-west monsoon. Suggested optimum seeding time for rainfed castor is second fortnight of June in Andhra Pradesh and other southern states, and first fortnight of July in Gujarat and Rajasthan. Information generated hitherto indicates that September-October is ideal period for rabi castor, while January is optimum for sowing summer castor.

In case the other kharif crops could not be sown due to delayed monsoon, castor can form a better contingent crop even for sowing up to 15 August in rainfed areas of Andhra Pradesh.

Varieties: A large number of high-yielding varieties/hybrids resistant to biotic stresses like wilt and root rot are available for recommendation to different regions (Table 33.40).

Seeding methods and devices: Castor is generally sown behind the country plough in Andhra Pradesh. For quick coverage and uniform stand, use preferably seed-cum fertilizer drills wherever available. Various devises like ‘pora’ tube (a bamboo pipe tied behind the plough with a hopper at the top), FESCO plough and single row seed drill help in placement of seed and fertilizer at appropriate moist zone and ensures better germination, vigorous growth and development..Castor-seed takes around 7-8 days to emerge and completes germination by 10-12 days in kharif and 15 days in

1183

OILSEED CROPS

winter to germinate depending on the prevailing temperatures. Place the seed in moist zone below the soil surface for better germination. To eliminate light and partly filled seeds, soak the seed in water for 24 to 48 hours. This would also help in quick germination of seeds.

Seed rate and spacing: The seed rate used for sowing in drylands is normally 10- 15 kg/ha while in irrigated areas, seed rate of 5-6 kg/ha is adequate. A plant population of 18,500/ha and 14,000/ha was found to be optimum for rainfed and irrigated areas Tespectively. About 5-6 kg seeds/ha is adequate for getting the desired plant population.

Square planting at 75 cm x 75 cm for rainfed areas and 90 cm x 90 cm for irrigated areas would help in running the blade harrow both ways and reduce the cost of intra- row manual weeding. It also helps in controlling the excessive vegetative growth and prevents lanky growth of the plants. In case of delayed sowings, resort to closer spacings, i.e. 60 cm x 30 cm or 90 cm x 20 cm, in order to curtail excessive vegetative growth and to compensate for the reduced growth.

To achieve required plant stand in drylands, dibble 1-2 seeds/hill and thin out one seedling 20 days after sowing, maintaining one healthy seedling. In areas where there is excessive moisture due to heavy rains in early part of the season or irrigation, adopt wider spacing. There is a tendency for the castor crop to put-forth excessive vegetative growth with elongated internodes whenever there is abundant soil moisture and cloudy weather. In such situations, adopt wider row spacing of 90 cm x 90 cm or 120 cm x 60 cm.

Nutrient management: Castor is highly responsive to fertilizers, fertilization with 10-12 tonnes/ha FYM during land preparation helps in moisture retention besides providing nutrition to the crop. Fertilizer recommendations vary with growing conditions and productivity levels (Table 33.41).

In rainfed areas, apply 50% N and all P, K as basal and top dress 50% N 30-35 days after sowing. In irrigated areas, all P and K and 25% N are applied basal. The remaining 75% N is applied in three splits after each picking.

In soils deficient in sulphur and micronutrients like Zn and Fe, application of 10- 20 kg S, 10 kg ZnSO, and 30 kg FeSO,,/ha is recommended. It is also possible to substitute up to 75% N amounting to 60 kg N/ha through castor-cake, FYM and in - situ green-manuring in places like Rajasthan.

For intercropping systems involving castor, like groundnut + castor (3:1) in Saurashtra region of Gujarat, application of recommended dose of fertilizer to both groundnut and castor on area basis is recommended to obtain higher yields and returns.

Weeding and interculture: Castor is very sensitive to weeds. In rainfed areas, 2-3 intercultures with bullock-drawn blade harrows starting from 25 to 30 days after planting combined with one manual intra-row weeding after first interculture effectively checks weed growth.

Weeds are more serious problem even in irrigated castor. Hence, crop may need 2 or 3 hand weedings at intervals of 15-20 days in order to keep weeds under check. Alternatively, pre-plant application of herbicides such as Fluchloralin or Trifluralin @ 1.0 kg a.i./ha or pre-emergence application of Alachlor @ 1.25 kg a.i./ha is equally effective under irrigation.

Water management: Castor gives good response to irrigation due to its perennial nature. Castor crop does not need much water in the initial stages of vegetative growth. However, in case of prolonged dry spells during grand growth period, one protective irrigation either at primary spike development or secondary spike initiation/ development will greatly benefit the crop and improve yield. Under intensive management, all currently recommended popular, medium, long-duration hybrids/ varieties require 5-7 irrigations in sandy loams of Gujarat and Rajasthan and six in the red soils of Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh. For realizing the full productivity potentials, the first irrigation should be applied at around 55-75 days or around full flowering of primary spike. The subsequent irrigations may be given at intervals of 20 days after first irrigation, so as to ensure availability of adequate moisture for the development of different spike orders.

Insect-pests and diseases

Castor is affected by a number of insect-pests and diseases (Table 33.42).

1185

OILSEED CROPS

Integrated management of important insect-pests and diseases of castor

Burn and destroy crop debris

Follow crop rotation with cereal crops

Grow tolerant varieties like Jwala, and JHB 665.

Maintain sufficient soil moisture through soil-moisture conservation practices and irrigation at critical stages

Treat the seed with Thiram @ 3 g/kg or Carbendazim 2 g/kg seed or Trichoderma viride, 4 g/kg seed

Use of non-spiny varieties (48-1)

Adopt wider spacing and avoid close spacing

Remove infected spikes/capsules and destroy

Provide additional dose of 10 kg N/ha after cessation of rains/cyclonic storms

Spray Carbendazim (0.05%) or Thiophanate methyl (0.05%) before onset of cyclonic weather based on weather forecast.

1186 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

1186

Harvesting and threshing

Castor, by nature is a multiple branching type. On an average, it produces 4 to 5 sequential order spikes over a span of 180 to 240 days, one each at an interval of about 30 days. The main spike is ready for harvest within 90-120 days after planting. The subsequent pickings can be taken up at intervals of 30 days. Physiological maturity in castor is attained when some of the capsules in a spike turn brown in colour. The matured spikes are cut and dried in sun for few days for easy threshing. For good seed filling, oil content and germinability, harvest when the capsules turn yellow and start drying.

Threshing is usually done by either beating the capsules with sticks or alternatively by trampling with bullocks or tractor wherever possible. Of late, power-operated mechanical threshers are also available.

Yield potential

On an average, about 800-1,000 kg/ha seed yield is obtained under rainfed conditions and about 1,500 to 2,500 kg/ha under irrigated conditions depending on the genotype and growing conditions. Yield as high as 5,000 to 6,000 kg/ha has been realized by farmers in Gujarat regularly under high input management.

LINSEED

Linseed is one of the most important industrial oilseed crops of India and stands next to rapeseed-mustard in rabi oilseeds in area and production. It is grown either for the oil extracted from the seed or for fibre from the stem. India ranks first in terms of area under linseed cultivation and third in production in the world. The production of linseed is restricted only to cooler climates and to special niches for realizing higher productivity of either of its products— fibre and oil.

Linseed (flax) is one of the oldest cultivated plants grown by humans for food and fibre. The origin of linseed is not certain. Most believe that flax originated in an area east of the Mediterranean sea, near India because of the great diversity of forms found in this region. From there, it apparently spread north and westward. Seed-type flax grown for its oil was developed primarily in south-western Asia.

Seed contains oil ranging from 37 to 43%. Every part of the linseed-plant is utilized commercially either directly or after processing. Most of the oil is used in industry for manufacture of paints, varnishes, inks, soaps and very small fraction of it is used for edible purposes. The oil-cake is a good feed for milch cattle and also used as manure. The fibre extracted from the stem is lustrous and blends very well with wool, silk, cotton etc. Strong twines, canvas, suiting, shirting and various products used for defence purpose are manufactured from linseed fibre. The oil is rich in linolenic acid which oxidizes on exposure to air and that is the reason of short life of this oil. After hydrogenation, linseed oil may be a good substitute for imported tallow. The woody matter and short fibres may be used as raw pulp for making paper of high quality.

The cultivated linseed (Linwan usitatissimum n= 15) belongs to the family Linaceae. Linseed is an annual herb with a thin, erect and wiry stem, about 60-100 cm high. The fibre-type cultivars are generally slender, tall, non-tillering and slightly branched. The cultivars for seed purposes are usually smaller, much branched and profusely tillering. The smal] flowers with bright blue but sometimes pink or white petals grow on terminal

1187

OILSEED CROPS

panicles. The flowers are self-pollinated, although, cross fertilization is possible. The fruit is a round capsule divided into five chambers, each containing up to two yellow or brown seeds.

Distribution, area and production

Linseed is an old world crop that was probably cultivated first in southern Asia and Mediterranean region. There has been general downward trend in area planted to linseed which began shortly after World War-II. During 2006, the total world linseed area was 3.02 million hectares with a production of 2.57 million tonnes and productivity of 852 kg/ha. India, Canada, China, USA, UK, Germany, Ukraine and Russia are important countries in the world producing linseed.

In India, linseed is cultivated in about 4.68 lakh ha and the total linseed production is 1.63 lakh tonnes with 349 kg/ha productivity (2007-08). Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Bihar and Orissa are the major linseed producing states in India. It is grown to a small extent in Jharkhand, Karnataka, Assam, Rajasthan, West Bengal, Himachal Pradesh, etc. There has been continuous decline in linseed area in the country during the last four decades. Linseed recorded annual compound growth rates of -2.11, -1.19 and 0.93% in area, production and productivity during 1950-51 and 2006-07.

Climate and soil

Linseed is a cool-season crop and requires moderate to cool temperatures during the growing period. It is generally grown where annual precipitation ranges from 48 to 76 cm. Linseed needs about 25-30°C during germination of seed and about 15- 20°C during seed formation. But, the fibre crop requires still lower temperature and high humidity. Temperature above 32°C accompanied with drought during flowering stage reduces the yield, oil content of the seed and quality of oil. The plant is susceptible to frost.

It is grown best in well-drained, fertile, medium and heavy soils especially silty loam, clay loam and silty clays. Light soils are unsuited for seed-crop. It thrives well in soil having pH ranging from 5 to 7. The crop grows well in alluvial loams of Indo-Gangetic plain and black cotton soils of the central and peninsular region.

Cropping systems

Linseed is grown in monocropping, intercropping, sequence cropping and paira/ utera cropping. Monocropping is followed in specific nitches on low fertile lands under rainfed situation with limited growing period with neglected management practices. Linseed can be grown in fields where other crops may fail.

Sequence cropping

The common rotations with linseed are: hybrid maize-linseed + wheat-sorghum; hybrid maize-linseed + chickpea; hybrid pearl millet-linseed-cowpea-wheat; groundnut linseed + wheat; soybean-linseed; fodder sorghum-Egyptian clover-hybrid maize- linseed; fodder sorghum - clusterbean-linseed-cowpea-barley; maize-peas-pearl millet- linseed; rice (early)-linseed.

1188

In rainfed areas, linseed is generally grown mixed with chickpea, lentil, wheat, barley, safflower, etc., to stabilize production and to increase monetary returns (Table 33.43),

Cultivation

Land preparation: Since linseed area is rainfed and is grown in marginal and sub- marginal lands, adoption of soil and moisture conservation practices is important for realizing optimum production of linseed. The land should be ploughed 2-3 times with the help of a cultivator followed by planking. Soil should be pulverized and brought to a fine tilth with 2-3 harrowings. Hoeing after each good shower makes good moisture conservation. There is no need for any tillage operation for ufera cultivation.

Varieties: Use of appropriate linseed variety for a given region and situation is the major input for improving the productivity of linseed (Table 33.44).

Sowing time: The sowing time for linseed varies from October to 15 November in different states, depending on the availability of soil moisture/irrigation and cropping systems. Early sowing helps the crop to escape attack of powdery mildew, rust and linseed budfly in different regions.

Early sowing is crucial for rainfed conditions and sowing can be delayed by a week under irrigation.

Spacing and seed rate and sowing: Linseed is sown either by drilling in prepared seed-bed or by broadcasting in the standing rice crop as ufera. A row spacing of 20-30 cm with a plant to plant spacing of 7-10 cm is ideal to get higher production.

The seed rate depends on the method of planting, genotype, soil fertility and moisture status of the soil. The normal seed rate for linseed varies between 25 and 50 kg/ha. In general, bold-seeded variety requires more seed rate for normal plant population. For utera crop, cuscuta-free 30-35 kg/ha seed should be broadcast with crack system of sowing in Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh, while 40-45 kg/ha is used in Punjab and Himachal Pradesh.

Sowing should be done by placing the seed at a depth of 2-3 cm. Shallow sowing is

1189

OILSEED CROPS

Tablr 33.44 Recommended varieties of linseed for different areas

advantageous when there is adequate soil moisture which helps in early establishment of the crop. Drill sowing facilitates even distribution of seed and uniformity in depth of seeding results in better plant stand and higher yields. In drier situations, where surface moisture is not favourable, sowing at deeper layers in moist zone (5-8 cm)

1190

ensures germination. Linseed is sown, broadcast in standing rice, when the latter is near maturity and grown as paira/utera.

Nutrient management: Nutrient and moisture stress conditions are mainly responsible for low productivity of linseed in India. Organic manures benefit through increasing water-holding capacity of soil and improving soil structure, besides providing limited complete nutrient supply. Application of 5-8 tonnes of FYM/ha or compost at the time of final land preparation is beneficial for linseed. Response of linseed to fertilizer application is influenced by variety, environment, soil and agronomic practices (Table 33.45).

In rainfed areas, all the fertilizers are applied at sowing. However, in irrigated areas, application of nitrogen in two splits, first as basal at sowing and the second at 25-30 days after sowing at first irrigation results in higher yields. For utera crop, 20 kg N/ha should be applied 2-3 days before broadcasting the seed.

Besides NPK, in sulphur-deficient soils, application of sulphur up to 30 kg/ha gave significant response in linseed. In ufera cultivation of linseed, response to zinc has been observed in many states. Zinc deficiency can be overcome by 22.5 kg/ha of ZnSO,, once in 2-3 years. For immediate correction of deficiency in standing crop, spraying ZnSO, after 2 weeks of emergence is promising.

Weed management: Weeds can cause yield losses up to 40% in linseed. Initial 20- 45 days after sowing is critical and ensuring weed-free conditions in this period is essential for optimum production of linseed. Clean cultivation by way of 2-3 ploughings after the harvest of previous crop reduces the initial load of weeds. One hand-weeding 15-20 days after sowing, followed by hoeing controls the germinating weeds and conserve moisture. In irrigated areas, two weedings manually at 20 and 30-35 days after sowing is essential. Pre-plant incorporation of Fluchloralin at | kg a.i./ha or pre- emergence application of Alachlor or Methabenzthiozuran at | kg a.i./ha or post- emergence application of Dichlofop-methyl 0.7 kg a.i./ha at 30 days after sowing are

1191

OILSEED CROPS

quite effective in controlling weeds and giving linseed yield comparable to manual weeding.

Linseed is frequented with cuscuta infestation which causes serious yield losses by parasitizing on the plant from 15 days after sowing onwards. The problem is serious in Orissa and Chhattisgarh. Crop rotation with non-host cereals is the ideal solution. Herbicide Pronomide (Kesb 50 wD) @ 1.5 kg/ha is most effective to be applied as post-emergence at 2-3 weeks stage. Fluchloration or Pendimethalin each at | kg/ha as pre-emergence application can also reduce the infestation of cuscuta in linseed. Clodinafop 80 g/ha as post-emergence application at 30-35 DAS is also very effective in controlling weeds under irrigated condition.

Water management: Linseed responds to irrigation profitably. Yields can be doubled with | or 2 irrigations given at 35 and 75 days after sowing. On light soils, 3-4 irrigations may be needed. Drought during and after flowering reduces the yields of both seed and straw, while moisture stress during stem elongation benefits seed yield and adversely affects straw yield. Branching, flowering and grain filling are critical stages for moisture. .

Insect-pests and diseases

Insect- pests and diseases can cause up to 22-56% yield loss in linseed and sometimes up to 100% under epidemics. Linseed bud fly, semilooper, wire worm, cut worm and termites are major insect-pests on linseed, and bud fly is the most important pest reducing the yield beyond 60%. Among the diseases, rust, powdery mildew, wilt and Alternaria blight are the major ones (Table 33.46).

1192

1192 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

(Table 33.46 concluded)

Utera cultivation

Jawahar 7 and R 552 should be grown in Madhy Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and adjoining areas of Orissa; and Surabhi, LC 185 and Himalini in Himachal Pradesh.

Heavy-textured soils with good water-retention capacity should be preferred.

Sufficient farmyard manure (FYM) or green-manure should be applied along with phosphatic fertilizers to rice.

A dose of 10 to 20 kg N/ha should be applied, 2 to 3 days before linseed is sown.

The seed rate should be 30-40 kg/ha.

Cuscuta infestation, particularly in the Chhattisgarh, causes heavy losses. To ensure clean cultivation, Cuscuta seeds should be separated and discarded from the seed lot before sowing linseed.

Sowing linseed when rice is at dough stage has proved to be the best. However, sowing may be done 10-12 days before rice is harvested, but should be completed by October.

The weather should be clear at the time of sowing. Rains affect the plant stand adversely.

Manual weeding should be done once or twice.

Crack system of sowing is a new method which can be followed in areas where sufficient water is available. In this method, 5 cm deep cracks are allowed to

1193

OILSEED CROPS

develop in the field when rice crop is at the boot leaf or panicle-initiation stage, and the field is watered. After keeping the water standing for 5 to 7 days, the normal practice of wtera is followed. This method would give 60-100% more yield and has been found to have no adverse effect on rice yields.

Harvesting and threshing

The crop should be harvested by sickle when the leaves are dry, the capsules have turned brown and seeds have become shiny. The harvested crop is dried in the field. Threshing is done by beating with sticks or by treading of cattle. The seeds are cleaned with the help of winnower. A relative humidity of 70% with 8% moisture content in the seed is the ideal condition for storage of linseed seed.

Yield potential

The yield varies according to the varieties and growing conditions. In general, a yield of 800-1,000 kg/ha under rainfed conditions, 1,200-1,500 kg/ha with heavier soils and protective irrigation and 1,600-2,000 kg/ha under irrigated high input management can be expected.

Double-purpose linseed

Linseed can be grown for both seed and fibre purposes. In double-purpose varieties, none of the two end-products, i.e. fibre and seed, are sacrificed. In practice, providing ideal agronomic environment to get more of either of the products is contrasting, especially in warmer regions when the growing period is limited or short. Double- purpose linseed varieties are expected to show differential or modified response to the inputs and growing conditions, especially to nutrition and temperature. The extraction of fibre from linseed requires cooler temperature during retting process. This becomes a major limitation in our country when after the harvest of the crop the temperatures rise and affects quality of fibre and thus Indian flax does not command good price in the market. However, with the development of dry scutching machines, this problem has been overcome partially. This machine puts entire biomass of linseed stem even grown for oil purpose, for fibre extraction which otherwise was being wasted.

DPL 21, LCK 152, RL 993 (Meera) are the promising double-purpose linseed varieties in India. Sowing in the first fortnight of October at a row spacing of 15 cm with 75 kg N/ha using a seed rate of 30 kg/ha has been optimum.

Retting: Retting is a process of treatment of stalks for final fibre extraction. The time taken for retting depends on a number of factors such as genotype, water quality and water temperature. Retting can be cold water retting, hot water retting, snow retting, dew retting and chemical retting. In India, it is done in ordinary waters in rivers and tanks. Retting in stagnant water is faster than running water due to higher microbial load and activity. Retting takes 4-6 days at a temperature of around 40°C at harvest.

Retting process needs to be completed immediately after threshing to extract fibre before the onset of monsoon. The stalks are tied and allowed to remain immersed in water till retting is completed. During the process, the bundles should be shuffled by replacement of upper layer to lower layer after 2-3 days for ensuring uniform retting of the entire Jot.

1194

Determination of proper time for retting is very important for when the straw is under ret, the separation of fibre is difficult and when the straw is over ret, the fibre will be weak in strength and results in more short fibres of low market value.

* When straw is bent around the finger, the wood in the centre should spring clearly through the sheath of the fibre.

* Ifa piece of the fibre is separated from the straw, it should break under strain without leaving a square broken end.

After removing the retted straw from the stagnant water, it should be cleaned in running water to remove the dirt and deposits of gummy substances which gives odd smell. The cleaning will soften the fibre and will increase acceptability. On cleaning, the straw should be drained of excess water, air-dried and sun-dried in field and bundled. In most of the linseed-growing regions in India, under rainfed conditions, lack of water availability for retting is the main cause for not extracting fibre from the crop as by-product after removing seeds. However, in view of the development of dry scutching machine which can extract fibre from un-ret straw, the opportunity is promising for higher fibre production from linseed.