SOURCE_DOCUMENT: Chapter 4.pdf

4. Hill Agriculture

The development of hilly and mountainous areas and protection of their ecology have become matters of national concern, as these are the recognized climate makers and repository of rich biodiversity. Hills are the lungs of the country. The hilly and mountainous areas differ from the plains in topography, elevation, physiographic feature, diversity of habitats for flora and fauna, ethnic diversity, land-use systems and socio-economic conditions. Hills, in general, offer a vast scope for cultivation of diverse mix of crops—cereals, pulses, oilseeds, vegetables, flowers and fruits. Animal husbandry is an integral part of farming system. Temperate climatic conditions support growth of some fruit and vegetable crops, which otherwise cannot be cultivated in plains and the produce provides higher dividends to the cultivators in hills thereby raising their economic status. However, due to increasing population pressure, the land on the hills in general, is not being cultivated on the scientific principles. Marginal and sub-marginal lands have been brought under plough without taking adequate conservation measures, which sometimes cause degradation of production resources (land, water and vegetation) resulting in devastating floods in the plains destroying crops, buildings, enterprises and adversely affecting human beings due to silting of the riverbed, reservoirs and other water bodies.

Agricultural development in hills is constrained by lack of location-specific appropriate technology, inadequate infrastructure, poor input-output marketing, insufficient extension education and network, decrease in area for forest dwellers and diversity in farming systems or land-use type. Traditional agriculture is practised which combines crop production with livestock, horticulture and farm forestry or agro-forestry in an integrated fashion, which is adapted to the limitations of climatic and edaphic conditions.

Inaccessibility, fragility, marginality, heterogeneity, natural instability and human adaptation mechanism are the six mountain specificities which have been identified to be key factors to be addressed for sustainable agricultural development in hills. Crop production, livestock, horticulture and farms or agro-forestry are the recognized four major components of hill agro-ecosystem. To meet the demands of increasing population we have to conserve the natural resource base and ensure its optimal utilization for attaining sustainability. The resource base in agricultural production system includes land, air, water, energy and biogenetic diversity. Land and water are the most important factors in agricultural production and the production in plains too is dependent on the management of agri-geo-biotic factors in hills or mountains. If the natural resources are managed effectively, efficiently and optimally in the hills, they will positively influence land and water resources.

CHARACTERIZATION

Geographical distribution

Hilly and mountainous areas in India are vastly distributed all over the country

with a large area located in the Himalayas, extending to 2,500 km in length and 250 to 400 km in breadth. Areas under the nomenclature of Hill and Mountain Zones are located in various states of the country, viz. Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. Over 35% of the total geographical area of the country has slope above 15%. Himalayas in India are classified in two major categories comprising (i) Western Himalayas: Jammu and Kashmir, and Himachal Pradesh and eleven hill districts of Uttarakhand, and (ii) Northeast Himalayas: Sikkim, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, hilly areas of Assam and Darjeeling district of West Bengal. Longitudinally, Himalayas are also classified as Shiwaliks flat summits [600—1,200 m above mean sea-level (a.m.s.1.) altitude], Middle Himalayas (65-75 km width, average height 3,000 m, tangled mass of ranges and valleys with major rivers cutting across it), Greater Himalayas (average altitude 5,200 m a.m.s.l., 92 peaks over 8,000 m a.m.s.1.) and Trans-Himalayas (average width 60 km, average altitude 4,500 m m.s.1.). Besides this mighty hilly and mountainous zone, hills also extend or exist in other states, the characterization of which have been given in Table 4.1. The basic feature of hill agriculture is the cultivation of mixed on terraced fields.

(Contd...)

HILL AGRICULTURE

(Table 4.1 concluded)

Resource base

Keeping in view the decline in land : human ratio, the future food, fibre, fuel, and fodder requirements have to be met through enhancement of the productivity with the efficient use of natural resources. To conserve and improve the natural resources for

increased and sustained production, the analysis of resource base becomes of great relevance particularly, the resource base of hills and mountains which not only allows judicious use of resources in situ but also affects the use of natural resources available in the highly productive plains. Soil, water, climate, vegetation and livestock are the five natural resources, which control the paradigm of successful food security.

Soil resources: Soil is the basic natural resource for plant growth. The parent material, and the prevailing processes of soil formation in an area determine the type of soil formed, and the topography of the land where it is formed determines its further development or movement. Since hilly and mountainous lands of India have a great diversity with regard to parent material, processes of weathering, climate, and biological activity, various types of soils are formed. These soils coupled with climatic conditions and availability of water determine the adaptation of agricultural, horticultural and forest vegetation. In India, 26.8 million ha land accounts for hill and farai soils.

Climate: Various approaches have been used to classify the climates right from the simplest ones utilizing parameters of rainfall or temperature regimes which influenced vegetation. The FAO classification categorized the whole world into 14 major climates from Warm Tropics to Cold Temperate climates utilizing isolines of growing periods of 30 days intervals on the basis of mean daily temperature, precipitation and potential evapotranspiration. Later on, the Planning Commission identified 15 resource development regions of India, 14 on main land and the remaining one in the islands of Bay of Bangal and the Arabian sea. Out of these 15, 9 regions of India consist of hills and mountains with varying climatic conditions from dry temperate desert to hot humid/ arid tropics.

Water resources: Water—a renewable resource, continually reprocessed and delivered—is a biological necessity and supreme wealth. It is used directly by human beings: for changing biological productivity through irrigation; for drinking, cooking, washing and bathing; as an industrial raw material and coolant; as a flow resource for diluting and removing waste materials; for hydro-electric generation, fishing and providing transportation and recreation.

India is one of the few fortunate countries with vast water resources and yet, there is no single year when we do not experience both droughts and floods in one or the other parts of the country. It is estimated that annual surface flow of water is about 180 mhm, of which only about 70 mhm is harnessable because of terrain conditions, sporadic rains and dearths of suitable sites for dams. Similarly, the annual recharge of groundwater is estimated as 50 mhm and the amount utilizable about 35 mhm. The total water resource potential of India is 394 mhm.

Water in hills and mountainous areas is available through precipitation in the form of rains, sleet, hails and snow. The runoff from the hills and snow from snow-bound high hills melt and turn into river streams either directly or through seepage springs. Most of the water in the form of rains is received during monsoon. The outer barrier of Himalayas which rises over 2,000 m, exhausts the initial force of monsoon and thus, the higher hills receive more rainfall or precipitation than the lower ones. The glaciers generally lie above 4,000 m in external valleys and 5,000 m in inner valleys, but in the larger valleys these even cross this limit, e.g. Pindari terminates at 3,267 m and Milam at 3,463 m elevation.

From transverse ridges of waterpartings, the rivers emerge and while traversing

HILL AGRICULTURE

through valleys and plains, provide water for various purposes. The major rivers in the North western and Central and mountainous region of India include Indus, Jhelum, Chenab, Ravi, Beas, Sutlej, Yamuna, Pindar, Girthi, Bhagirathi, Alkhananda, Kali, Sarju— Ramganga (eastern), Gori, Dhauli, Kuti, Ludhiya, Ramganga, Kosi, Dabaka, Gola and Nandhor. In the Eastern Himalayan Region, Brahamputra and Barak, in Eastern Plateau Hill Region Vainganga and Subarnarckha, in Western Plateau Hill Region Narmada and Kaveri, in Southern Plateau Hill Region Godawari, Krishna and Mahanadi, and in Gujarat Hill Region Sabarmati and Luni are the important rivers. The flowing rivers in hills and mountains are tapped by the inhabitants to a lesser extent, but these hills provide large impressive water storage structures which not only provide water for hydro-electric purposes and/or fisheries but also for irrigation facilities for plains—which are considered food production bowls. Such examples are the Bhakra Dam, the Rihand Dam, and the Chohal Dam in the Western Himalayan Region.

Vegetation: Since the hills and mountains are spread over a great range of elevation from 200 to 7,500 m or so and climatically take a latitude from tropical to temperate, there is a great diversity in its natural vegetation. In addition, variation in precipitation, associated with the alignment and altitude of hill and mountain ranges determines the altitudinal adaptation, growth and variety of vegetation. As a consequence these areas possess a rich natural vegetation. In general, the Western Himalayan Region, which extends from Kashmir to Kumaon has temperate zone rich in forests of pines, other conifers and broad-leaf temperate trees. Higher up the forests of deodar, blue pine, spruce and silver fir occur. The Alpine Zone extends from upper limit of temperate zone of about 4,750 m or even higher. The characteristic trees of this zone are high level silver fir, silver birch and junipers. The Eastern Himalayan Region extends from Sikkim eastwards and embraces Darjeeling, Kurseong and Arunachal Pradesh. The temperate zone has forests of oaks, laurels, maples, rhododendrons, alders and birch. Many conifers, junipers and dwarf willows also occur.

The Deccan region comprises various kinds of scrub jungles to mixed deciduous forests. The Malabar region covers the excessively humid belt of mountain country parallel to the west coast of peninsula. Besides being rich in forest vegetation, the south region produces important commercial crops, viz. coconut, betelnut, pepper, coffee, tea, rubber and cashewnut, whereas north region produces apple, walnut, chestnut, peach, plum, cherry, almond, apricot, citrus, litchi, mango, guava, pomegranate, and above all various cereals, pulses, oilseeds and vegetables.

Livestock: \t is vital sector of India’s agrarian economy, more particularly the rural economy. It has potential to generate self-employment. The livestock rearing activity also provides subsidiary occupation to a large section of society particularly to the people living in the drought-prone or rainfed hilly areas where crop production on its own may not be very productive and engaging them fully or wholly. Landless, marginal and small farmers engage themselves in this activity either on full-time basis or partially for gainful employment. Livestock is central to agricultural development and for maintaining soil fertility. The contribution of the livestock sector to national economy can be assessed from the fact that the gross value of output from livestock sector alone, was about Rs 1,302 billion in 1999-2000 which was equal to about 24% of the value of total output from the agricultural sector. This excludes the contribution of animal draught power. According to livestock census (1997) the country has 197.7

million cattle, 88.8 million buffaloes, 0.5 million yaks (Poephagus grunniens), 0.133 million mithuns (Gravaeus frontalis), 56.7 million sheep, 120.77 million goats, 13.58 million pigs, and 352.02 million poultry birds. Mithun is confined to NEH region, whereas yak is found in the high hills of North-eastern as well as western Himalayas. In hilly and mountainous areas the livestock resources are poorly managed. In Himachal Pradesh alone, there are 2.17 million cattle and 0.616 million buffaloes with a total milk production of 0.50 million tonnes. Yak, a multipurpose animal, called as the camel of the cold high land zone, contributes a large share of the livestock population in Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, and Sikkim. Mithun, a high value livestock of Arunchal Pradesh and Nagaland, is a prestige symbol and is exchanged during marriages as per status of a family. In general, in hilly and mountainous areas cows, buffaloes, yaks, goats, sheep, pigs, and poultry birds are reared for different purposes, viz. milk, meat, eggs, draught etc.

PREDOMINANT PRODUCTION SYSTEMS— PRODUCTIVITY AND CONSTRAINTS

Production system as a concept takes into account the components of farming, namely livestock, horticulture, agroforestry, pastoral, silviculture systems, and other resources with the farm family at the centre managing them independently or in complex diverse mixed form giving rise to multiple-sustainable approach. Since hilly and mountainous areas in India are located under a variety of agro-climatic situations ranging from tropical to temperate climatic extremities, varied types of production systems are in adoption with different kinds and magnitudes of constraints in realizing the full utilizable potential of biological and physical resources. Broadly, the hilly and mountainous areas of India can be classified into nine regions, viz. Western Himalayan region, Eastern Himalayan region, Eastern Plateau hilly region, Central Plateau hilly region, Western Plateau hilly region, Southern Plateau hilly region, East Coast hilly region, West Coast hilly region and Gujarat hilly region.

Predominant production systems of hilly and mountainous areas are described here.

Western Himalayan Region

In this region, five major production systems exist, viz. cereal-based production system, horti or agri-horti-production system, vegetable or floriculture or mushroom- based production system, livestock-based production system, and agri-horti-silvi- pastoral production system.

Cereal-based production system

Cereals occupy 2.65 million ha area. Based on the irrigated and rainfed situations and the location of cultivable land in the agroclimatic zone, the cropping intensity varies widely from Jammu and Kashmir to Uttarakhand.

Rice, maize, wheat, barley, pulses and oilseeds are the major crops which are grown under cereal-based production system. Leaving aside the sub-montane areas of Punjab and Shiwalik hills of Haryana, rice is cultivated in Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand on 0.63 million ha with lowest productivity of 1.50 tonnes/ ha in the hills of Uttarakhand and highest productivity of 1.97 tonnes/ha in Jammu and Kashmir during 2004-05, Wheat is cultivated on 1 million ha with lowest

HILL AGRICULTURE

productivity of 1.89 tonne/ha in Himachal Pradesh and highest in Uttarakhand (2.04 tonnes/ha). Maize, which occupies maximum area of 0.324 million ha in Himachal Pradesh (out of 0.676 million ha) also yields the highest (2.27 tonnes/ha).

Pulses in North-western Himalayan states occupy 0.108 million ha with an average productivity of 0.567 tonne/ha, which is almost at par to national productivity (0.577 tonne/ha). The area under oilseeds has been 0.17 million ha with a productivity of 1.02 tonnes/ha, which is more than the national productivity (0.885 tonne/ha). Oilseeds productivity is higher in Jammu and Kashmir (1.125 tonne/ha).

Horticulture or agri-horti production system

The region has a wealth of horticultural crops covering alpine to temperate species and extending even to tropical ones. A large variety of horticultural crops are grown in the three states of Western Himalayas. The total aréa under fruits in this region is 0.576 million ha with annual production of 1.727 million tonnes. The major fruits are apple, pear, peaches, plum, apricot, cherry, walnut, almond etc. among temperate fruits and citrus, litchi, mango, guava, pomegranate etc. among subtropical fruits mostly grown in sub-mountainous areas and the foot-hills. Among the fruits, apple dominates in all the three states, contributing together about 98% of the total apple production of the country and covering over 39% of the total area under fruits in the three states. The increase in area and production over past 40 years establishes the dominance of apple in the horticulture/agri-horti production system being adopted in Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir and Uttarakhand hills.

Vegetable, floriculture, mushroom-based production systems

The vegetable-based production systems either wholly support the vegetables throughout the year or contribute largest share to the production system. The major vegetables grown in this region are cole crops (cabbage, cauliflower and knol-khol), cucurbits, carrot, capsicum, tomato, radish, peas, french bean, potato, onion, etc. with a total area of 0.184 million ha and annual production of 2.81 million tonnes. The production of vegetables has increased substantially because of the advantage of becoming an off-season vegetable production for plains, proving thereby quite remunerative to the hill farmers. The region also provides an ample scope for the cultivation of exotic vegetables like broccoli, celery, leek, asparagus, lettuce and brussel- sprouts.

Potato alone accounts for 12% of the area under vegetables in the region and Himachal Pradesh has provided a strong base for the production of high-yielding virus- free seed tubers of improved varieties apart from supplying potato to the plains during off-season. Ginger, turmeric and chillies are the major spices in Himachal Pradesh, while chillies and garlic cover a sizable area in Jammu and Kashmir. However, Jammu and Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh are also known for kesar (saffron) and kalazira (black cumin) cultivation.

The region grows a variety of flowers promoted by diverse agro-climates and the demand from the distant markets. The major flowers grown are gladiolus, orchids narcissus, daffodils, freezia, carnations, chrysanthemum, roses, tulips, lilies, geranium and tuberose.

Promotion of mushroom cultivation is also associated with this production system.

Agri-horti-silvi-pastoral production system

The contributions are based on the principals of optimum utilization of land. Fruit trees and field crops have been grown in various ways in the hills. Cash crops like ginger, turmeric, potato, tomato, and chillies are generally integrated with fruit trees, Forage production is of utmost importance for the land sites. Growing of trees and pastures increases the system productivity, enhanced fodder availability and checks soil erosion.

Livestock-based production system

Adaptation to altitude and associated changes in major climate elements in the region determine the type and breed of livestock, and various factors such as large diurnal variations, higher rainfall, more cloudy days, and low atmospheric pressure affect the livestock productivity. Still livestock rearing in hills provides a boost to the farmer’s economy, as most of the time the results from the cultivation of field crops are erratic due to the vagaries of weather, and low productivity of land. The region inhabits about 16 million livestock population, which include cattle, buffaloes, sheep, goats, yaks, mules, ponies and donkeys.

Adaptation, housing, ventilation, working capacity, production, nutrition, health, parasitic problems and helminths are major issues to be addressed.

In the high hill dry zone of Himanchal Pradesh, 82% of the livestock population consists of sheep and goats. In winter, they move to the low hills and in the summer they come back to the high hill pastures, thereby making fuller use of the resource diversity. In the high hills wet zone (apple-based farming system), farmers maintain crossbred cattle and these are mostly stall-fed. Except for the high hill dry zone, the number of large animals possessed by the farmers is higher in all the farming systems. Both manure and draught powers are important need necessitating the possession of large animals.

Dependence on forestry sector-generated inputs

Dependency of farm production activities on inputs obtained from farm and forestry, common property resources, and government forests is high. Inputs obtained from these resources (i.e. inputed value of grass and grazing, leaf fodder, and wood for implements, packing cases, and staking), are low in the low hills, moderate in the mid-hill vegetable based farming system and the highest in the apple-based farming systems.

Constraints in production systems

The Western Himalayan Region has many peculiar constraints associated with it, which hinder rapid progress in agricultural development in various production systems. Following are the major constraints confronted:

Physical constraints: Physiography and small, fragmented and scattered holdings limit mechanization of farming. Undulating topography, severe soil erosion and difficult water conservation practices limit sustainability and stability of productivity. Lack of irrigation facilities render the agriculture on major land areas as rainfed.

Socio-economic constraints: Resource poor condition with low purchasing power restricts the farmer in the use of capital intensive modern agricultural technologies. Restriction farm-women in trainings to learn new techniques, who otherwise look

HILL AGRICULTURE

after majority of farm operations. Decision making process dominated by tradition- bound and less enthusiastic elders leads in slower adoption of new technologies. Social and economic diversities affect community efforts in development.

Technological constraints: Non-assessment of technologies for economic viabilities and operational feasibilities under actual farming situations where they are to be adopted, is a hinderance in the adoption or advocation of new technologies. Largely, being rainfed area, the suitable technologies are still inadequate. In certain cash crops effective technology with respect to disease control, e.g. bacterial wilt in solanaceous crops is lacking. Technologies based on low cost inputs and based on locally available material for proper feeding and disease control in animals are not available. Technologies to reduce the drudgery of farm women in the region are lacking and have been a persistent requirement.

Administrative constraints: These include lack of adequate and timely supply of agricultural inputs essential for improved agricultural production; easy availability of farm credit for capital intensive agricultural technologies; well-established custom service centres for custom hiring services to help the resource poor farmers in the adoption of high-tech agro-techniques; regulated market facilities for effective and economic disposal of marketable surplus produce with the adoption of new technologies; indifferent attitude of farmers in the adoption of risky capital intensive crop and cattle management technologies due to weather related crop failures and animal deaths; and administrative co-ordination for input management and marketing of produce turning the efforts made futile in training and motivating farmers.

North-eastern Himalayan Region

In North-eastern Himalayan Region cereals, plantation crops, horticulture, agro- forestry, livestock, and bamboo-based production systems dominate. Livestock contributes significantly to the farm income. The farmers of the region are very innovative and have developed some farming systems efficient at that time, such as shifting or jum or swidden cultivation, silvi-agri-livestock-fisheries production system (zabo production system), rice-based production system, agro-forestry-based production system, horticulture-cum-plantation crops-based production system, vegetable-based production system, and livestock-based production system.

Shifting or swidden or jhum cultivation

Shifting cultivation regarded as the first step in transition from food gathering and hunting to food production, is a nearly 9,000 years old practice. The minimal definition of shifting cultivation as any agricultural system in which fields are cleared by firing and are cropped discontinuously, reflects its real value. India can be divided into 2 zones for analysing shifting cultivation. The first is Central India comprising Madhya Pradesh and Orissa; and the second North-East India comprising Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh. It can be characterized into 4 categories: (i) Exclusive dependence: Landless and immigrant with their households exclusively dependent on shifting cultivation; (ii) Major dependence: includes tribes of which 50-75% depend almost wholly on shifting cultivation, while the rest may take up other modes of agricultural production and income supplemented through mining or wage labour, tea plantation labour; (iii) Contingent dependence: emerging

out as resettlement action of governments for 2 or 3 years of shifting cultivation; (iv) Marginal dependence: includes tribes whose income from cultivation does not constitute more than 25% of total income from all sources.

Though shifting cultivation is known by different names in different North-Eastern States, but have common characterstics of rotation of fields such as use of fire for clearing the land, keeping the land fallow for regeneration for a number of years, use of human labour as main input, non-employment of draft animals, use of very crude and simple implements such as dibble sticks and scrapers, and all the crops grown are mixed together. The average land holding varies from 0.12 ha/cultivator in Manipur to 0.49 ha/cultivator in Tripura.

Shifting cultivation (slash and burn) is a widely practised food production system in north-eastern hill regions on steep slopes. The system involves cultivation of crops. Land is cleared by cutting of the forests, bushes, etc. up to stump level in December- January, leaving the cut materials for drying and final burning to make the land ready for dibbling of seeds of different crops before the onset of rains. The cultivation is confined to a village boundary and after 2 or 3 years the cultivated area is abandoned and a new site is selected to repeat the process. The hutments of the village remain at the same place. Earlier, the whole village used to shift to the new site. The mode of land allotment to individual families varies from tribe to tribe. Initially when the system originated, it followed jhum cycle of 25-30 years enabling the soils to mine adequate nutrients from the subsoil and enrich the surface soil through decomposition of the litter fall. This was the cheapest system of food production. Burning could control the soil-borne diseases and pests, besides the addition of minerals through ash. However, due to increased demographic pressure on land the jhum cycle reduced to 3—S years, which hardly provide time for natural regeneration of soil fertility. Entire operations of shifting cultivation from forest clearing, burning, sowing to harvesting are performed in collective mode by 425,000 farm families.

Entire cultivation is done on zero tillage except in some parts of Mokokchung where little hoeing is done to remove the weeds. This accelerates further soil erosion. The soil loss varies from 30 to 170 tonnes/ha/year, depending on the slope, rainfall and vegetative cover. As a result of this, fertile top soil has been detruncated and even the bed rocks are exposed. Second year of shifting cultivation is more hazardous than the first year. The area affected by shifting cultivation is of the order of 2.7 million ha.

Shifting cultivation provides a basis for subsistence farming, maintenance of cultural values and social stability at low population density. In the present context, the system cannot sustain increased demographic pressure. The village council (Mizo Hills) or by village elders through lottery system (Manipur and Mikir Hills) or by Nokma (village chief) in Garo Hills of Meghalaya, etc. decide the allotment of land. The plot size is generally dependent on the family size. Upland rice is the main crop grown in mixture with maize, millets, foxtail millets, beans, tapioca, yam, banana, sweet potato, ginger, cotton, tobacco, chillies, sesame and vegetables. Normally the choice of the crops depends on the needs and preferences of a family. All these crops are sown by dibbling, are rainfed and harvesting starts from August onwards. Maize and cucurbits become available first for consumption. Rice harvesting starts with availability of matured panicles. During the second year, usually a single crop of rice is grown. After 2-3 years of cultivation, the land is left fallow for regeneration of forest vegetation.

HILL AGRICULTURE

Mostly, the economy of the shifting cultivators is limited and usually there is little marketable surplus. Marketing facilities are deficient. The surplus produce is exchanged with traditional goods. Money lenders lend money to the cultivators at exhorbitant high interest rates and once trapped in the vicious circle, the cultivators seldom escape. Almost half of the income comes from the mixed land-use (silvi-horti-livestock) in the backyard.

This system in the present context has become not only unproductive because of the exposure of rocks due to soil erosion, heavy slit load in streams and drying of perennial water sources, loss of plant nutrients, loss of forestry resources and loss of flora of human and animal importance, but has also become hazardous to the environment, and acts as a severe constraint to rise above the bare minimum level of subsistence for people who practise it.

Cultivation on raised beds

Cultivation of tuber (potato, sweet potato) and rhizomatous crops (ginger, turmeric) on raised bed along the slope is quite common in the central plateau of Meghalaya. The system involves arranging of dried locally available vegetation material in the form of beds along the slope, covering these beds with soils collected from the surrounding in February. The beds are put up to fire and the tubers are sown in March. This system is mostly responsible for large-scale degradation in central plateau of Meghalaya. With every tonne of potato cultivation, 2 tonnes of soil is lost. The situation in Cherrapunji and adjoining area has become such that now there is hardly any soil left to make the raised beds. This is a matter of great concern.

Silvi-agri-livestock-fisheries production system (zabo production system)

Zabo is an indigenous farming system practised in Phek district of Nagaland, which has a combination of forest, agriculture, livestock and fisheries with well-organized soil and water conservation base. Zabo means impounding of water. The system has forest land on the top of the hill, water-harvesting tank in the middle and livestock yard and rice fields at the foothills. In some of the cases when a proper site is not available for water storage, the runoff water from the upper catchment area is taken directly to the rice field. The water loss is controlled through puddling and use of rice husk on shoulder bounds. It envisages proper utilization of rainwater and maintenance of soil health due to organic source of crop nutrition. By following this method, available water can be utilized very efficiently and soil loss by erosion is reduced to the minimum. The system also encourages the farmers for rearing livestock as a subsidiary source of income.

Construction of terraces: The terraces are constructed by the farmers in a laborious but scientific manner. The width of the terrace depends on the slope, keeping the maximum height of the riser up to 1 m in general.Contour lines are drawn by scrapping the top soil upwards so that the sub-soil is exposed for firm foundation. Leaves and branches of alder (Alder nepalensis), Albizia sp. and other thrash material are added and covered with the soil for decomposition.

Rice-based production system

; The region produces 4.04 million tonne of rice annually. High-yielding varieties

have not gained momentum because of low irrigation potential created and very low level of fertilizer consumption (14.5 kg ha compared to national average of 74.8 kg/ha).

The Apatani plateau, occupying a stretch of about 26 km? in Subansiri district of Arunachal Pradesh, is the ‘rice bowl’ of ‘Apatani’ tribe who practice wet rice cultivation and has good knowledge of land and water management. The valley has humid sub- tropical type of climate. The soils are humid, black and reddish. The terraces have been developed on alluvial materials washed down from the hills.

The system is, in fact, cultivation of rice on terraces prepared on mild slopes in the valley. Terraces in the main valley are quite broad, perfectly levelled and provided with strong bunds. The bunds are made of soil and supported by bamboo or wooden chips at base, if the height of the riser is more. :

The Apatanis have developed a remarkable system of water management and irrigation. Every stream rising from the surrounding hills is tapped soon after it emerges from the forest, channelized at the rim of the valley and diverted by a network of primary, secondary and tertiary channels. At the short distance above the terraces, occurs the first diversion from the stream. Usually only a little water is allowed to flow in the first feeder channel while the stream continues its course. The feeder channel branches off at angles which lead water through the series of terraces, so that by locking or opening the connecting ducts any field can be flooded or drained as required. The cross section of the main channels ranges 1.0—1.7 m in width and 0.45—0.65 m in depth, while that of sub-channels ranges 0.75—0.96 m in width and 0.38—0.65 m in depth.

Nutrient and fertility management of the terraces is done mainly through the recycling of agricultural waste. Community performs many big operations. A proper code for erection of riser as well as maintenance and release of water for irrigation is followed. Apart from conserving the soil, farmers have taken up the plantations of Terminalis myrinalia, Ailanthus excelsa, Michelia sp., Magnolia sp., pines and bamboo. Thus, the entire hills surrounding the valley, and uplands surrounding the villages are fully kept conserved as forest.

Along with rice, the pisciculture is also practised. Intercropping and mixed cropping can provide a solution to the evergrowing food requirements.

Agroforestry-based production system

North-east hills except Arunachal Pradesh have also experienced heavy biotic pressure. This is most true for shifting cultivation in the eastern hills and massive clearance of forests for tea cultivation in Darjeeling and foothills of other eastern states and commercial exploitation in these areas. Hence, a need was felt to introduce agro-forestry to meet the wood and fodder requirement considering the agricultural productivity, conservation, agro-ecosystem, tree farming and rehabilitation as major issues of sustainability through agroforestry. Agroforestry in the Himalayas or for example in any other upland region is different from the plains whose vast stretches of land are available for integrating trees with crop. The size of agricultural holding is too small in hills to adopt the system but the available community lands or wastelands demand their edaphic rehabilitation by culturing multipurpose trees which when densely packed with small espacement shall also improve the biomass production. Large caradamom plantation is an example of commercial agro-forestry. Cultivation with alder tree is done in Nagaland for maintaining soil fertility and getting sustainable

HILL AGRICULTURE

crop yields. The alder tree is also helpful for providing shade for coffee at lower altitudes and for cardamom at higher altitudes. Extraction of bamboo from natural forest is also in practice for paper industry. Hence bamboo cultivation needs priority. Litter fall also enriches the soil. Sometimes to meet the gap of wood for packing cases the tree culture is integrated with horticulture (silvi-horticulture). Sericulture also holds a great promise for which mulberry plantations play an important role.

Horticulture and plantation crops-based production system

Several fruit crops like pineapple, banana, mango, papaya, litchi, guava, pomegranate, poniol, jamun, kardo, amara, and autenga are commonly grown in north- east Himalayan region. The region has nearly 24,000 ha land under pineapple, producing about 0.282 million tonnes and more than 30,000 ha under citrus fruits with an average production of over 0.138 million tonnes,

In Asom, coffee plantation in hilly zone occupies 1,045 ha area producing 50 tonne coffee beans. Likewise, Assam alone contributes 50% of tea production in India. In Arunachal Pradesh also, several new tea units have come up with the Tea Board’s assistance. Rubber plantation in north-east region covers 19,000 ha area with a total production of 400 tonnes rubber. Low temperatures in winter and high altitude situations of north-east region are the major constraints, contributing towards the low productivity of rubber.

Vegetable-based production system

Vegetables are grown mostly in the backyards and in few states for the market covering a large variety of beans, cucurbits, cabbage, radish, tomato and brinjal. Potato is most important cash crop, particularly in Meghalaya, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and Assam. The major potato-growing belts are Khasi hills and Jaintia hills of Meghalaya, Kameng and Subansiri districts of Arunachal Pradesh, north and east districts of Manipur.

Livestock-based production system

The diet for the bulk of the population being animal protein; there is a vast internal market for meat, eggs and fish. These are in short supplies despite great scope for the development of these sectors through genetic improvement of breeds, proper health care, and management practices. A comprehensive package of practices, based on scientific investigations, for improvement of livestock productivity in north-east Himalayas is lacking. Most of the animals in this region are non-descript except few sheep and goat breeds. This region accounts for 16% of the pig population. The animals from this region are less productive, slow growing and late maturing. The local animals, however, have developed over generations an adaptation value and thus, thrive better than the exotic and crossbred animals introduced for enhancing productivity, under similar conditions of management. There is a great scope for rearing of rabbits for meat and fur skin. The ICAR has developed suitable knowhow for that housing, ventilation, poor working environment, reproduction, poor nutrition, health, and parasitic infestations are major problems in livestock production in this region.

Mixed homestead garden—traditional agroforestry system

Agroforestry is an age-old practice in the region. Pineapple, arecanut, mandarin orange, citrus, betelvine, black pepper, jackfruit etc. are the dominant plant species. Under-storey crops such as vegetables, beans, cucurbits, ginger, turmeric, are grown with some tree species. A number of forest tree species are still being maintained in shifting cultivation areas. The best examples are Pinus kesia and bamboos in Meghalaya and A/nus nepalensis in Nagaland. Bamboo resources are high-value potential crops for agroforestry with short gestation and recurring return for the house-wives and others.

Broom grass—a high value cash crop

Broom grass (Thysanolaena maxima), a grass with soil conservation value and established market as cash crop can be grown in the wastelands. The fine root system of this grass protects from soil erosion and prevents the land slides and has wide scope for multiplication without any care and protection. It is being used for terrace riser stabilization and as fodder during lean period.

Eastern Plateau Hill Region

Rice, maize, wheat, finger millet or ragi and barley are the major crops in this region. Among pulses pigeonpea and chickpea, and in oilseeds rapeseed, mustard, and niger are grown. Gourds, potato, sweet potato, onion, garlic, tomato, brinjal and okra are major vegetables, while mango, jackfruit, guava and litchi are the major fruit crops grown in the area. Forests comprise sa/, bija, sisoo and sandalwood forest trees.

Fallow-niger or fallow—pulses are the main cropping sequences followed in medium land unirrigated conditions. Under irrigated conditions, vegetables and rice followed by ragi are the predominant systems. Ginger and turmeric are grown in a very large scale in kitchen gardens and on hilly slopes. The rhizomes are planted during April— May and harvested during December—January. Fibre crops like mesta, sunnhemp, cotton and jute are grown on marginal lands. Among livestock, cattle, buffaloes, goats and sheep are predominant, whereas the population of pigs is the lowest. Commercial livestock farming is at domestic level. Pig, sheep and goat are reared for meat purposes.

Owing to scarcity, erratic and uneven distribution of rainfall, the zone suffers from frequent droughts. Entire hilly regions of western undulating zone of Orissa falling in this region are covered with forests and contain mineral deposits of magnesium, graphite and bauxite. Scarcity of water, lack of horticultural development programmes especially for marketing and processing facilities, acidic nature of soil, much less headway made in animal husbandry, fisheries and silvipastoral programmes, poor breeds of animals and low milk yields due to shortage of fodder and degraded peripheral forests are the major constraints in the existing cereal, livestock, agroforestry, agro-silvi-horticulture production systems prevalent in the region. About 30% of the forestlands are estimated as degraded.

Central Plateau Hill Region

Rice, wheat, maize, sorghum, kodo-kutki, maize and barley are major cereal crops grown in this hilly region. The average productivity of crops are low. Pulses (chickpea, pigeonpea, urd, kulthi, lentil), oilseeds (sesame, niger, mustard, linseed, soybean, groundnut), and vegetables (pea, tomato, potato, turmeric, colocasia, sweet potato,

HILL AGRICULTURE

coriander, chillies, ginger, garlic) are also grown on a large scale. Mango, kaitha, jamun, bel, custard apple, aonla, ber and guava are the major fruit crops of the region, while tamarind and betelvine occupy an important place among cash crops. Monocrop (Haveli system), bunded uplands, and millet-based farming systems are common. Soil erosion, extremely low productivity of all the crops except kodo-kutki, imbalanced and low level use of fertilizers (less than 10 kg/ha), nitrogen, phosphorus, zinc and manganese-deficient soils, low available soil moisture on account of erratic rainfall distributions and texture of the soil resulting in wilting of crops even when there is a short spell of drought and crop failures, if drought prolongs, are the main constraints marring the agricultural productivity. In certain areas where stratum is rocky, feasibility of irrigation is another constraint.

The region comprises 27 to 30% area under forests, but on the other hand it has more than 2.76 million ha cultivable wastelands also which can be put under agroforestry system. The low productivity of indigenous breeds of animals in this region and poor fodder availability are major constraints.

Western Plateau Hill Region

Cereal, horticulture and livestock-based are the 3 major production systems in the region. However, within the cereal- and livestock-based production systems a great variety of crops are grown and animals are reared.

Rice, ragi, sorghum (kharif and rabi), kodra, pearl millet, maize, and wheat are the main cereals which are grown in the Western Plateau Hill Region. However, the productivity is quite low with rice yielding on an average 0.387, wheat 1.025, maize 0.811, pearl millet 0.293 and sorghum 0.559 tonne/ha. Sugarcane, a cash crop in the region yields 81 tonnes/ha.

The production system comprises growing of crops dependent on bi-model distribution of rainfall integrated on the type of soil. In sub-montane zone of Maharashtra comprising eastern slopes of Sahyadri ranges proportion of kharif to rabi food crops is about 67 : 33 which shows that kharif is the main crop season where soils are texturally light and utilize rainwater effectively, whereas in the same region Western Maharashtra Scarcity Zone (Sholapur, Ahmednagar, parts of Satara, Sangli, Pune, Kolhapur, Dhule, Jalgaon and Nasik districts) which have swelling shrinking type of montmorillonite clay, makes it difficult to handle the land during rainy season. This restricts cultivation of crops during kharif in a proportion of 25 to 30%, leaving large proportion to rabi cropping. The productivity of kharif as well as rabi crops is very low. Farmers are not using fertilizers on a large-scale under dryland and have yet to adopt high-yielding varieties. The adoption of plant-protection measures has not made any dent on the dryland farmers.

Niger, groundnut, safflower are the major oilseed crops and arhar, gram, greengram, and blackgram are the main pulse crops grown in the region. Mango, cashewnut, jackfruit, karonda, jamun, guava, banana and grapes are the major horticultural crops grown in this region.

Livestock is a backbone of the farming system which either becomes important for draught power in some parts of the region or for breeding purpose in the second part ras milch animals (80% female buffaloes) in the third part or as a major resource in Stabilizing the income of the farmers in certain areas by providing sheep and goats for

commercial meat production. Poor feeding, management, nutrition and rearing of local breeds, low average production of animals, limited available forage and fodder are the main constraints in livestock production. Certain parts of the region have practically no irrigation with a maximum of irrigation only up to 10% in other parts. The farmers on the marginal land have taken up agroforestry.

Southern Plateau Hill Zone

In this zone, major production systems are based on cereals, horticulture/plantation crops, agroforestry, and sericulture, livestock and livestock + crop production. Under cereal-based production system, sorghum, rice, pearl millet, ragi, maize, wheat, blackgram, greengram, red gram, sunflower, castor are grown. The average productivity of these crops, in general, is low except for ragi. Constraints of cereal-based production system include: (/) problematic acidic non-irrigated hill soils, (ii) low productivity of pulses, (iii) diseases infecting oilseeds and pulses, (iv) uncertainty with regard to quantity as well as time of availability of irrigation water, (v) poor fertility status of hill soils (-N, —P and —Zn), (vi) low water-holding capacity, (vii) shallow soils prone to severe soil erosion, and (viii) high uncertainty and erratic distribution of rainfall. To tackle the high-risk proposition in crop production in drought-prone areas the small and marginal farmers combine livestock especially sheep and goat with crop production.

Mango, guava, sathugudi, acid lime, hill banana, grapes and pineapple are major fruit crops of the region, which also suffer from the climatic and edaphic constraints. Beans and chow-chow are the major vegetables grown in these areas. Coffee, pineapple and cardamom are raised as plantation crops in the region and jack fruit and pepper are grown as intercrops in coffee estates. Clove and nutmeg are also grown in these plantations. Next to agriculture, the village people thrive on animal husbandry through milk production, goat and sheep rearing and poultry husbandry farming. Sericulture with the support of mulberry plantation on about 625 ha area in Coimbatore district is picking up. The farmers facing shortage of water for crop production are also gradually taking up sericulture.

Lack of agro-technolog suitable to the socio-economic conditions of the tribals for replacing the existing practice of shifting cultivation (podu) in Andhra Pradesh, non- availability of suitable forage crops for the cattle population maintained by tribals, lack of suitable methods of management of agroforestry in these hill tracts, and lack of suitable horti-silvipastoral cropping system are few critical constraints in these areas which are responsible for low yields of the different components in the production systems.

East Coast Hill Region

Depending upon the irrigation facilities there are 2 production systems: (i) rainfed crop production system, and (ii) irrigated production system. Both are cereals based except where single crop of ginger, turmeric, tapioca, redgram, or monsoon potato or tomato is taken under rainfed situations in place of single crop of rice. Pearl millet—niger, fingermillet-niger and maize—mustard are the other 3 cropping systems followed under irrigated conditions of East Coast Hills. Where irrigation is available rice-potato or cabbage, runner bean-mustard—potato, maize—potato, rice- potato or okra and under lowland conditions rice-rice are practised.

HILL AGRICULTURE

The existence of problematic saline or alkali soils, poor drainage, and low soil fertility are the main constraints in production.

West Coast Hill Region

Plantation crops like tea, coffee, rubber and cardamom dominate the high range regions of Kerala. Rice based, coconut based, cassava based and homestead farming are the 4 identified production systems in the hills of Kerala. In high land, crop sequences followed are rice-banana or cassava, rice—rice—fallow, rice-rice—pulses or vegetable or oilseeds or sweet potato. Important perennials are pepper, cardamom, coffee, tea, coconut, and rubber. The area under High Altitude Zone of Kerala covers areas above 750 m a.m.s.l. and in this zone the average productivity of rice is 1.62 tonnes/ha, pepper 0.17 tonne/ha, cardamom 0.08 tonne/ha, arecanut 0.86 tonne/ha, cashewnut 0.34 tonne/ha, banana 13.66 tonnes/ha, coconut 4,877 nuts/ha, rubber 0.61 tonne/ha and mango 2.14 tonnes/ha.

In the hills of Kerala coffee shares about 15% of the total cropped area followed by rice (14%), cardamom (13.9%), rubber (12.4%), tea (7.8%), pepper (7.9%), coconut (5%) and cassava (4.5%). Cabbage is grown as pure crop and as mixed crop with pepper. In Karnataka, rice, pulses, ragi and sorghum are the main crops. In Maharashtra Coastal Zone, mango, coconut, arecanut, cashewnut, jackfruit, banana, pineapple and chiku are grown. Alphonso variety of mango is the cash crop of this region. Average yield of rice is only 1.52 tonnes/ha and that of ragi 0.85 tonne/ha. In High Altitude and Hilly Zone of Tamil Nadu coffee, potato, banana, mandarin orange, pear, wheat, garlic and plums are grown in upper Pulney hills, while in lower Pulney hills, pineapple, pepper, beans, pomegranate, cardamom and lemons are also grown. Improved crop varieties, plant-protection measures, low fertilizer usage in crops other than commercial crops, and weather vagaries are the main constraints in crop and fruit production.

Gujarat Hill Region

In Gujarat, the hilly Peninsular region of Saurashtra and the hill tract on the north- east and east exclusively constitute the hill regions.

Ragi, kodra, banti, wari and cheno are the hilly millets which are grown in this hill region along with rice, sorghum, pearl millet, wheat, cotton, niger, groundnut, sesame, mustard, castor, pulses like pigeonpea, greengram, condiments like fennel and cumin, and vegetables and potatoes. The major crop sequences are ragi—arhar, rice-wheat, cotton—pearl millet, cotton—groundnut, maize-wheat, cotton or millet-mustard, pearl millet—castor or cumin or isabgul. Growing of crop mixtures are also in vogue.

A comparison of yield levels from 1961-62 through recent years indicates that yield levels in pearl millet, sorghum, castor, wheat, rice, groundnut and pulses in hills of Gujarat has gone up. However, in maize and minor millets a decline in yields has been noticed. Animal husbandry contributes about 50% of the total income from agriculture in the state. The proportion of purebred animals hardly exceeds 25-30%. Kankrej and Gir breeds of cattle and Surti breed of buffalo are primarily known for their production potentials. Besides cattle and buffaloes, the farmers rear sheep, goats and poultry.

Since most of the areas in the hills of Gujarat are rainfed, major constraints in Production include (i) poor water conservation practices, (ii) inadequate dryland

farming technology, (iii) lack of wasteland management practices, (iv) non-availability of agroforestry and arid horticulture development technology, (v) lack of early- maturing, fertilizer-responsive varieties of groundnut, pearl millet and sorghum, and (vi) non- availability or -supply of seed of improved rice varieties with the recommended package of practices to take two crops instead of one.

Land capability classification

The land capability classification is an interpretative grouping of different soil units and serves as an important role in land-use planning to show the relative suitability of soils for cultivation of crops, pastures, forestry in addition to focusing the problems, which need preventive measures. This provides clues to the management and improvement of different soils for increasing production.

The land capability classification system is designed primarily for soil conservation and is intended for determining the maximum intensity of land use consistent with low erosion risks and sustained productivity. The basic USDA Land Capability Classification allocates land suited to cultivation to classes I to [V followed by land suited to grazing to classes V-VI, and forestry to class VII, leaving class VIII for wild life and recreation. These classes may then be divided into subclasses based on the number of severity of several limitations which downgrade land from class I.These includes erosion risk (e), wetness (w), rooting zones (soils), limitations (s), and climatic limitations. Depending on the severity of the limitations such as erosion and wetness, however, the land unit 1, 2, 3 may be used. The emphasis of the system is on environmental factors that cannot be modified practically. Thus, physical soil features such as texture, are accorded greater significance than chemical characteristics, such as pH. Poor soil drainage would lower the land class, if it could not be rectified by field drainage. Similarly, soils with a drought hazard need not be downgraded, if supplementary irrigation becomes feasible.

TECHNOLOGIES FOR ENHANCING SUSTAINABILITY OF PRODUCTION SYSTEMS

Looking at a brighter side, many developing countries have made remarkable progress in improving the production and productivity of basic food crops during the last 30 years, as a result of which most countries in Asia have been able to achieve a growth rate in food production exceeding that of the rate of growth in population. Such progress has been possible through intensive agriculture based on the development and spread of high-yielding varieties of food crops coupled with good water and soil fertility management. However, without knowledge of intensive production system generated through painstaking research, it would not be possible to produce enough food to meet the needs of growing population.

Five basic principles which should shape the future development programmes in agriculture are: (a) the pattern of production advance should be land saving crop husbandry and grain saving animal husbandry, (b) ecological sustainability and equity in the use of natural resources should constitute the basic norms of all agricultural and rural development programmes, so that the livelihood of the poor is protected, (c) attention should be given to promote beneficial growth linkages among primary, secondary and tertiary sectors of economic activity, (d@) agricultural technology should

HILL AGRICULTURE

be intellectually satisfying and economically rewarding to attract and retain youth in farming and related activities in the village, as over 50% of the population is below the age of 21 years and the future of agriculture are in its hands, and (e) coastal and mountain area planning and post-harvest technologies should be given proper attention, so that the comparative strengths in agriculture with regard to exports are carefully identified and nurtured. Keeping in view a large number of small and marginal holdings in hills the economic stability can be achieved and sustained through diversification of the production systems by incorporating components of off-season vegetables, sericulture, medicinal plants, mushroom cultivation, fisheries, livestock, value-addition to the produce etc.

These basic rules should constitute the fundamental basis of the development of package of technologies, services and policies. The following technological interventions need attention in hill and mountainous areas for achieving the aim of sustainable livelihood security through sustainable agricultural development, which alone can provide the foundation for enduring ecological security.

Soil and water conservation: land shaping and development

Soil conservation measures include conservation farming, bunding, terracing and safe disposal of water, whereas water conservation reflects in mostly storage of rainwater in the soil profile and the measures include soil surface amelioration or treatment for higher infiltration rate, modification of soil profiles for higher water retentivity through structural variants or addition of high water retaining substances (organic matter). Soil conservation measures not only help in soil conservation but also in water conservation and conservation farming. The basic principle of water conservation should be to retain the water where it falls and utilize it efficiently.

Conservation of water can be divided into 3 categories, viz. (’) conservation of water received through precipitation; (ii) large dams, tanks and ponds, conservation of water in irrigation systems; and (iii) checking losses in seepage and evaporation and conservation of water through crop management and crop replacement or substitution and soil management.

Various soil and water conservation technologies, which are at present under recommendations, are:

Land levelling: To protect the sloppy land a levelling of land with a slope of | to 2% is recommended. It has been observed that after land levelling with a slope of 1% reduced the run-off to 5 to 6% of the rainfall in comparison to the natural slope of 5% yielding a run-off of 50%.

Contour bunding: On sloppy lands raising bunds of same height can effectively conserve the soil and water.

Contour trenching: Long slopes can be broken by excavating trenches (continuous or staggered) for trapping the soil particles being carried by run-off water and run-off water will get enough time for infiltration to recharge the soil profiles of hill slopes.

Terracing: On slopes with 8% gradient, levelled terraces are constructed to break the slope for soil and water conservation. A mild slope is given towards the hillsides of the terrace. As one moves higher into the mountains of Himalayas, the rainfall intensity drops and terrace system becomes less developed even on steeper slopes.

Contour cultivation: Soil as well as water on cultivable sloppy lands can also be

conserved by practising all the cultural practices across the slope of land on contours,

Stabilized drains: \t has also been observed that proper disposal of excess rainwater through stabilized drains helps in maintaining lands of cultivable fields and reduces soil as well as water losses.

Strip cropping: By following alternate strip cropping of erosion-permitting and erosion-resisting crops the soil and water can be conserved.

Seasonal land rest: To conserve water, in certain areas lands are kept fallow during kharif or monsoon season and cultivation of rabi is carried on residual conserved moisture.

Mixed cropping: Under low rainfall situations, mixed cropping also conserves and uses the rainwater effectively.

Cultivation of fast-growing and early-maturing crops: To conserve soil, cultivation of fast-growing and early-maturing crops or crop varieties is done so that cultivated bare land gets covered and impact of raindrops in detaching soil particles is reduced.

Use of mulches: Soil and water conservation is also managed by providing mulches through crop residue mulch, soil mulch and polythene covers.

Soil compaction: \n sandy soils, the soil as well as water both are conserved by compacting them with rollers.

Agroforestry for soil and water conservation

The latest concept and technology of agroforestry or agro-pastoral farming which is a type of adjustment to the constraining factors of crop farming such as marginal lands, high degree of slopes, and unfavourable ecological conditions has proved profitable in crop production. Ecological conditions in uplands, where there are high mountain ranges, rarely provide the conditions for crop farming and agri-pastoral farming, which is broadly defined as an agricultural system dominated by livestock rearing. Crops may be an integral part of the agro-pastoral system but in terms of both livelihood dependence and activities and output, livestock plays a central role.

Agroforestry interventions reduce erosivity of rainfall or runoff and erodibility of soil through dissipation of rainfall energy by canopy at low heights, surface litter, obstructing overland flow, root binding and improving physico-chemical conditions. Up to 30% slope in humid, subhumid and subtropical climate, alley cropping with Leucaena, Gliricidia hedges and grass barriers are effective for mulching and erosion control. In north-west outer Himalayas, Dehra Dun (1,740 mm rainfall), contour paired rows of Leucaena hedges, Leucaena and Eucalyptus trees and 0.75 cm wide grass barriers at 1.0 m vertical interval in corn brought down runoff from 40 to 30% of rainfall and soil loss from 21 to 8 tonnes/ha/year).

Under rainfed conditions of Dehra Dun, agro-horti systems of peach and turmeric gave highest return. In general, the growing of lemon grass as an intercrop lowered the nutrient status of peach leaves, especially Zn, N and P, as compared to turmeric intercrop. Kinnow-turmeric agroforestry system in V-shaped micro-catchment with Morus alba on field bunds produced 4.34 tonnes/ha kinnow fruits, 1.11 tonnes/ha turmeric from interspace and 2.24 tonnes/ha canes for basket making, 2.16 tonnes wood and 0.69 tonne leaves for sericulture from Morus alba. The system appears to be as alternate landuse for marginal class II rainfed land for sustained productivity. Plantation of kinnow at 4m < 4m spacing and bhabar at 50 cm x 50 cm after

HILL AGRICULTURE

minor levelling at Relmajra provided early returns to the farmers. The system was highly profitable and quickly pay off the levelling cost.

Vegetative barriers

Conservation through conventional engineering measures is too expensive. Hence vegetative measures, which are cost-effective and productive while being protective have great scope particularly in developing countries. An excellent example is utilization of Guatemala grass (Tripsacum fasciculatum; syn T. laxum) on lateritic soils of Southern hill region at Ootacamund for formation of Puerto Rico or California type terraces through vegetative barrier. Relatively cheaper and sustainable vegetative measures were found to be as effective as earthen bunds up to 1.5% slope at Indore and up to 4% slope at Dehra Dun. Performance of vegetative barriers is situation specific. Citronella has been effective for checking soil erosion in some parts of Diphu hills of Asom.Therefore, barriers of native grass species should be emphasized.

Agroforestry barriers are quite effective in controlling runoff and soil loss on 4% slope. Reduction in crop yield due to trees can be minimized by shifting the management of trees to contour hedge rows. The yield reduction was fully compensated by the tree biomass. The total sediment deposition along hedge rows (3-year period) and tree tows (9-year period) ranged from 184 to 256 tonnes/ha, equivalent to 15 to 20 mm soil depth.

Watershed management

The soil and water conservation measures have been described in isolation for better understanding of the subject (refer Chapter 13 for details). It is universally accepted that conservation should be essentially an area approach and the unit of its adoption should be a natural unit of watershed. Therefore, a combination of few approaches is required to be adopted in a given watershed. Watershed is a topographically delineated natural unit that is drained by a stream system. The watershed represents a hydrological unit of area, but can also be described as a biophysical, socio-economic and sometimes a political unit for planning and management of natural resources problem. Watershed management is an integrated approach, considering holistic development for all the users of the watershed.

Watershed management has been defined in India as “Rational utilization of land and water resources for optimum and sustained production with minimum hazard to natural resources”. The major components of work in the watershed are: (i) land treatment for soil and moisture conservation measures, (ii) introduction of an improved package of crop production, (iii) rainwater harvesting and safe disposal of surface run-off through field channels; (iv) alternative land-use systems like silvipasture, agroforestry and agri-horticulture to provide land cover and fuel, fodder and agricultural produce, and (v) improving the socio-economic conditions of farmers through agriculture-related vocation and finally to help in eco-stabilization.

Integrated watershed management is to be focused for management of natural resources and soil and water conservation. The essentials of watershed management involve followings:

* Priority areas should be identified and integrated development approaches followed,

* Community driven, involving interaction of users, agencies and developmental departments,

+ Should be bottom-up and flexible approach, with the capacity for making interim corrections,

* The execution of the progaramme should be carried out through village co- operative societies,

* People’s participation and gender neutrality, and

* Judicious and equitable sharing of costs and benefits.

Success of watershed management programme at Sukhomajri, Nadda Sahib and Fakot in India is well recognized. The productive and protective benefits from watershed management are considerably higher than the investment, benefit : cost ratio ranging from 1.92: | to 7.1 : 1 with 48 to 99% reduction in run-off and 81 to 98% soil loss. The impact of these changes led to the sustainable development of natural as well as cultural resources. Besides conserving soil and water, in Fakot watershed the outmigration of population to earn livelihood through employment generation got checked from 26.6% before watershed management programme to 9.3% during the project period. The participatory mode of the programme also developed confidence among women in decision making.

Sloping agricultural land technology (SALT)

Regenerative technologies for soil erosion control on sloping farmlands

This is an alternative to terracing system in the form of botanical options with a thinking that soil erosion is the main problem on the sloppy land farming and is a method of controlling erosion by farming natural terraces without involving much expenditure. These options are:

Tropical grasses: Pennisetum grasses, several species of vetiver, lemon grass, citronella, napier grasses, rhodes grass, tropical panic grass, and Calamagrostis species.

Temperate grasses: Switch grass, wheat grass (mentioned as vetiver for cool zone), pampas grass (Cortaderia), feather grass (Stipa sp.), bamboos, and giant reed and ribbon grass.

Shrubs and trees: Seabuckthorn, alder, leucaena, asparagus and Siberian pea shurb (Caragana sp.).

Contour grass strip as an erosion or soil conservation measure: The system allows for establishing contour grass strips (Setaria anceps) up the slopes at a vertical interval of 3 m and crops of farmers choice are grown in between. It is cheaper than terrace making and other biological options, is labour saving (300% less labour compared to terracing), and better crop yields because of effective soil conservation. Seven years average showed that soil loss from traditional farming methods was 113 tonnes/ha, from strip cropping 16 tonnes/ha, from leucaena strips 16 tonnes/ha, from terraces 1.9 tonnes/ha and from grass strips the least 1.6 tonnes/ha, and these do not involve any infrastructural investment.

A number of other practices are also available with twin purpose of soil conservation and soil fertility maintenance.

HILL AGRICULTURE

Regenerative technologies for the management of soil fertility on slopy land Agroforestry system and transformations: The system is derived from the farmers’ traditional systems of soil fertility management using biomass via livestock, and Provisions of products to meet the subsistence needs of the family. Agri-silvi-pastoral form of agroforestry has emerged as one of the potential options.

Sloping land management-oriented specialized forms of agroforestry: The trees of such agroforestry systems have both productive (supply of fuel-wood, fodder and fruit), and service functions (slope stabilization, erosion control, fencing and providing shade). The soil conservation concept can be considered as: Soil conservation = Control of erosion + Maintenance of fertility.

The SALT is environmentally sound, economically rational, developmentally desirable, more productive, technically a relatively simple replicable system, and less tisky.

Improved varieties of crops and trees: Management of natural resources such as soil, water as well as development of improved high-yielding varieties of field crops and horticultural trees suiting to agro-climatic conditions of hills and mountains holds key to increase the crop and horticultural production. Keeping in view the low yield potentials of different crops or horticultural trees various research organizations (SAUs and ICAR Institutes) have developed high-yielding varieties, crop production and protection technologies and need-based soil and water management practices for different agro-climatic regions of the country.

Water harvesting and recycling

Water harvesting is an age-old practice. The rulers of the bygone days used to get big tanks excavated for storing rainwater near the villages and this stored water served the farmers in the years of drought and helped recharge the groundwater.

In hilly and mountainous areas, especially in high rainfall areas, the water harvesting structures can act as moderators of flash floods and be a source of drinking and irrigation water during the times of scarcity. The country has 40 million ha of flood-prone areas and if farm ponds or tanks are excavated, the fury of floods can either be moderated or contained and stored water can be used for crop irrigation.

Unlike big irrigation projects, which are cost intensive and have a long gestation period, tank, pond or well can be put to productive use from the day it is created. Even a small portion of the money invested in major irrigation projects can change the face of drylands if it will be invested in these small irrigation sources. Under hilly and mountain conditions, wherever the concrete lined storage tanks or ponds do not serve the purpose, farmers should construct cheap polylined tanks as felt. The water from these tanks in hills can be successfully utilized by gravity flow if it is properly located above the cultivated area, otherwise a small water pump can be used for lifting water.

Organic farming

Hill farmers are aware of the importance of use of organics in agriculture. By and large, the consumption of chemical fertilizers is quite low in the hills. This can be exploited for the large-scale production of organic food for export market. Adequate market support system as well as certification mechanism need to be developed for the economic viability.

Agricultural implements

Small tools and machines are required by the hill and tribal farmers due to typical agro-climatic conditions and socio-economic factors. The lowland areas need special machinery to cultivate rice which should be light in weight and proportionately small in dimensions, permitting them to remain workable in small farm fields. Upland agriculture demands machinery to save time and remove drudgery mainly in land preparation, sowing, weeding and harvesting. In the hilly areas, mechanization is also required in handling of horticultural produce (fruits and vegetables), i.e. picking, packing and marketing.

The use of power tiller holds a promise in the hilly and mountainous areas for drudgeryless cultivation of farm and orchard crops on very narrow strips unsuitable to be brought under tractor cultivation. However, adoption of the power tiller is still at a low level due to the small uneconomic cultivable holdings of hill agriculture and heavy weight power tillers make it difficult to handle on the sloping lands.

Success of mechanization will depend on the degree of seriousness attached to the demonstrations, training and after-sale service by different agencies. The role of financial institutions and manufacturing organizations cannot be under-estimated in making agricultural mechanization in hills a success.

Niche for comparative advantage

Hills provide a niche for specific activities or products. High altitudes are very suitable for the seed production of vegetables, off-season vegetable production of cole crops, wood or bamboo-based cottage industries, generation of hydro-electricity, recreation park, cultivation of medicinal plants, flowers, organic farming, fishery, bee- keeping, mushroom cultivation etc. need to be accelerated judiciously.

In the valley areas, rice is the major crop during kharif. It offers immense potential for growing crops like beans, tomato, chillies etc. on raised beds before taking the main crop of rice.

Aromatic and medicinal plants

The majority of the medicinal plant species (70%) occur in the forest areas and the remaining 30% are found in the non-forest lands including lands under cultivation. The tribal people and the forest-dwellers collect a variety of leaves, fruits, seeds, nuts, roots, bark, tubers and rhizomes which have great medicinal value. But only a fraction of the vast resources (about 5%) is gathered for marketing. The reasons for such poor collection are: (i) absence of direct market linkage between the collectors of the medicinal plants and consuming centres. The hill farmers collect such items during the lean seasons, when they are left with no other options of livelihood, (ii) sporadic spatial distribution of the plants, which makes bulk collections impossible, (iii) inadequate knowledge about the medicinal values of many of the plants occurring locally, erosion of phyto-medicinal knowledge base, and (iv) shrinkage of common property resources (CPRS) and areas under forests. Population pressure and diversion of forestland for development activities are mainly responsible for such reduction in forest areas.

The collection of medicinal plants from forest areas and common properties provide income to the poor, the hill and the forest dwellers in their subsistence economy. A

HILL AGRICULTURE

study conducted by the Administrative Staff College of India, Hyderabad, indicated that agriculture production from tribal land is inadequate to maintain a household at subsistence level. The tribal people, hence, depend on collection of medicinal plants for their livelihood.

Realizing the importance of collection of wild medicinal plants in the tribal economy, the Indian Forest Policy, 1988 provided for safeguarding the customary rights and interests of tribal people. The provision asks for protection, regeneration and optimum collection of minor forest produce along with the institutional arrangements for the marketing of such produce.

The major factors lie with the marketing of such medicinal plants. Various pharmaceutical industries are specific for raw materials of their choice species. Unless there is market demand and assured price given to the farmer, it is absolutely difficult to motivate the farmer for such cultivation. When a raw material is available in nature, definitely the farmers will not go for cultivation by adding their own inputs. Hence banning of extraction of raw material from habitat and simultaneously encouragement for the cultivation of such medicinal plants are essential to boost up the economy.

Other improved management practices in forestry, horticulture and agricultural crops

For sustainable agricultural development with the objective of stable or increased productivity through ‘land saving crop husbandry’ and ‘grain saving animal husbandry’ with full ecological balance and security, it is essential that the hills and mountains should be effectively managed through improved practices. In crop husbandry, the latest high-yielding pest-resistant cultivars of different crops should be adopted in such a way that the perishable crops become cash-generating propositions, and the use of fertilizers coupled with water management should be efficient so that the ecological safety is ensured. Integrated plant nutrient management and ecofriendly approaches should be followed to get higher production and profitability vis-a-vis clean cultivation. In general, the hills and mountains being slopy, following guidelines can be used for scientific management of agriculture or forestry components.

¢ To overcome deficits in fodder and conserve ecology on steep slopes silvi-pastoral system should be adopted.

* Microplantations should be planted on the risers of fields for fodder and fuel needs.

+ In general, high-yielding tree-crop-animal components should be preferred over conventional resources.

* To arrest eco-anti-activity of shifting cultivation, the abandoned jhooming hillocks should be reclaimed by cultivating agriculture in one-third of the lower foot as bench terrace, one-third of horticulture in mid-portion on half-moon terrace, and forestry on the remaining one-third on top portion.

While cultivating the land for agricultural crops, it must be ensured to adopt erosion-resisting practices like execution of all the cultural practices along the contour, strip cropping leaving buffer strips in between or alternate strip cropping of erosion permitting and erosion-resisting crops, use of organic wastes as mulch to reduce impact of raindrops, contour bunding, contour trenching, terracing etc. Excess rainwater must be diverted through well stabilized drainage channels

118 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

either into a storage tank or structure or to the nul/ah through a well stabilized drop structure to avoid erosion forming gullies at the end.

For sloping agricultural lands, the SALT model should be followed in which cultivation on strips located on contours is recommended with intermittant plantation of leguminous hedgerows. In this system, alternate strips are cultivated for natural nutrient recycling.

* Under input intensive agriculture, fertilizers need to be applied based on soil- test values and requirement of crops.

* Optimum water management practices must be followed for site-specific conditions.

* Recycling of nutrients through microbial decomposition of biomass and enrichment of soil through N-fixing microbes.

+ Nutritional security is also an essential component in achieving the food security. Women and children are mostly at risk of poor health and quality of life due to nutritional deficiencies. Growing of varieties containing increased mineral and vitamin contents provide cost-effective and sustainable solutions to fight malnutrition.

* Proper input delivery and output marketing: Proper input availability at proper time and at proper place is the major factor for improving the agriculture in hills. Lack of this system is visible and reflects in the poor performance of agricultural indictors in hills. Similarly output sale at proper price at proper time with least cost needed to be planned for improving the agricultural development in hill regions of India. For this, states should come forward for decentralizing the planning and implementation process.

¢ Involvement of farm women in decision making.

The sustainability in hills can only be achieved if the technologies in vogue are modified in consultation with the local people through participatory approaches, whether it is agriculture, horticulture, forestry, agroforestry and animal husbandry. The joint management of different issues through participatory approach is the only solution for the optimal use of natural resources in the hilly and mountainous regions of India. This would ensure the conservation of biological diversity of plant and animal resources in these regions.

INTEGRATION OF NATURAL RESOURCES FOR ENHANCING SUSTAINABILITY

For different sub-ecozone or region, the integrated management strategies in the use or optimization of natural resources for sustainable production systems will be different. Based on the resource characterization and prevailing production systems following management core strategies can be indicated for different zones.

Western Himalayan Region

+ Intensification of soil and water conservation programme through watershed management with an integrated approach to forestry, horticulture, commercial crops, livestock and agroforestry for fuel and fodder,

* Appropriate land-use planning and need-based adoption of SALT,

+ Intensive cultivation of high value and low volume crops of fruits, vegetables, flowers, aromatic and medicinal plants and plantation crops such as tea,

HILL AGRICULTURE

With full development or strengthening of storage and cold storage facilities for transport, marketing and processing, this region can supply fruits, vegetables and cut-flowers to the rest of the country with a scope of export potential of these commodities. To ensure regulated supplies of low-volume high-value weather sensitive cash crops, the adoption of specific technologies like polyhouse techniques for raising risk free healthy seedlings of vegetables or flowers and their cultivation in such polyhouses is to be encouraged, .

Efficient water management through water harvesting technologies and by efficient water application devices such as sprinkler and drip,

Livestock management through integrated animal development techniques of breeding, feeding and proper health care, and

+ Procedural simplification of credit support and crop insurance cover for stepping up the use of inputs and adoption of modern technology.

Eastern Himalayan Region

¢ Adoption of soil and water conservation measures on micro- and macro- watershed approach,

¢ Adoption of ICAR technologies for alternative shifting cultivation,

* Keeping in view the vast potential of the region for agriculture including forestry and horticulture, a complete package in the form of inputs—improved seeds or saplings of fruit crops, fertilizers and pesticides, coupled with marketing facilities have to be organized, and

* Integrated farming systems developed by the ICAR Research Complex for the NEH region should be tested or modified as per suitability of the site and needs of the farmers.

Eastern Plateau Hills

* Intensification of soil and water conservation through watershed programmes and water harvesting,

¢ Animal husbandry, fisheries and silvipastoral programmes which have not made much headway must be taken up seriously with the participation of local human resources. All steps, right from breeding, feeding and health care of animals to fodder availability should be streamlined and strengthened, and

+ A large-scale afforestation programme to rehabilitate the peripheral forests must be taken up for ecological sustainability.

Central Plateau Hills

* To increase the existing low irrigation potential and cropping intensity, there is need to exploit minor irrigation schemes in the region,

* Intensification of watershed management programmes requires special attention to increase the productivity of agricultural crops,

* Diversification of low value cereal crops through high value ones with full back up of science and technology. Crop diversification should also be taken up by growing fruit and vegetable crops near the cities, and

® Intensive programmes have to be taken up to improve the productivity of the indigenous breeds of cattle. .

120 HANDBOOK OF AGRICULTURE

Western Plateau Hills

In areas where irrigation is available, technology for high value crops should be introduced,

Energisation of peoples’ participation in the development of minor irrigation schemes is required for increased and sustained productivity of crops,

* Check dam and community tanks have large scope,

° Stengthening of water saving devices such as sprinkler and drip for vegetable and fruit crops is required, and

* The productivity of cattle and buffaloes in this region is low and can be improved, if attention is paid towards cross-breeding programmes.

Southern Plateau Hills

* Diversification of low value cereals and minor millets cropping system with low volume high value crops requiring less moisture are to be encouraged. Horticultural crops like mango, citrus, ber, pomegranate and guava bear promise,

Adoption of proven dryland technology in watershed managementis to be ensured,

Fertilizer use in rainfed areas to be increased through large scale demonstration approach,

¢ Augmentation of fodder supply for livestock through agroforestry and horti- pastoral activities is required, and

¢ Intensification of cattle upgradation programmes through better breeding practices is required.

East Coast Hills

Strengthening of the input supply system by dovetailing it with transfer of technology holds great promise. In tribal areas the practice of shifting cultivation is to be replaced by integrated horti-agricultural programmes for better economic results. The animal husbandry programmes have also to be strengthened by improving the indigenous breeds through a cross-breeding programme and better supply of feed and fodder.

West Coast Hills

Rainwater management through conservation of rainwater either in situ or in tanks and micro-reservoirs, development of minor irrigation, crop diversification to replace the low-yielding rice and millets in the region with horticultural crops such as mango, banana and coconut along with their systematized marketing and processing by developing appropriate infrastructure are major concern where interventions are required.

Gujarat Hills

+ Integrated watershed development programme, rainwater harvesting and management require special attention in Gujarat hills for which agroforestry, grassland development and crop production with supplementary irrigation should also be components,

Transfer of technology programmes for the introduction and adoption of dryland farming technology with respect to early-maturing varieties and agronomic practices is needed, and

Development of agroforestry and arid horticultural technology along with grassland or pastures should form an integral part of watershed development programmes in Gujarat hills. ‘